 three plots within a figure.
In [105]: fig , axes = subplots(ncols=3, figsize =(15, 5))
Auto.plot.scatter('horsepower ', 'mpg', ax=axes [1]);

Note also that the columns of a data frame can be accessed as attributes:
try typing in Auto.horsepower.

62

2. Statistical Learning

We now consider the cylinders variable. Typing in Auto.cylinders.dtype
reveals that it is being treated as a quantitative variable. However, since
there is only a small number of possible values for this variable, we may
wish to treat it as qualitative. Below, we replace the cylinders column with
a categorical version of Auto.cylinders. The function pd.Series() owes its
pd.Series()
name to the fact that pandas is often used in time series applications.
In [106]: Auto.cylinders = pd.Series(Auto.cylinders , dtype='category ')
Auto.cylinders.dtype

Now that cylinders is qualitative, we can display it using the boxplot()
.boxplot()
method.
In [107]: fig , ax = subplots(figsize =(8, 8))
Auto.boxplot('mpg', by='cylinders ', ax=ax);

The hist() method can be used to plot a histogram.

.hist()

In [108]: fig , ax = subplots(figsize =(8, 8))
Auto.hist('mpg', ax=ax);

The color of the bars and the number of bins can be changed:
In [109]: fig , ax = subplots(figsize =(8, 8))
Auto.hist('mpg', color='red', bins =12, ax=ax);

See Auto.hist? for more plotting options.
We can use the pd.plotting.scatter_matrix() function to create a scat- pd.plotting.
terplot matrix to visualize all of the pairwise relationships between the scatter_
columns in a data frame.
matrix()
In [110]: pd.plotting.scatter_matrix(Auto);

We can also produce scatterplots for a subset of the variables.
In [111]: pd.plotting.scatter_matrix(Auto [['mpg',
'displacement ',
'weight ']]);

The describe() method produces a numerical summary of each column in
.describe()
a data frame.
In [112]: Auto [['mpg', 'weight ']]. describe ()

We can also produce a summary of just a single column.
In [113]: Auto['cylinders ']. describe ()
Auto['mpg']. describe ()

To exit Jupyter, select File / Close and Halt.

2.4 Exercises

2.4

63

Exercises

Conceptual
1. For each of parts (a) through (d), indicate whether we would generally
expect the performance of a flexible statistical learning method to be
better or worse than an inflexible method. Justify your answer.
(a) The sample size n is extremely large, and the number of predictors p is small.
(b) The number of predictors p is extremely large, and the number
of observations n is small.
(c) The relationship between the predictors and response is highly
non-linear.
(d) The variance of the error terms, i.e. σ 2 = Var("), is extremely
high.
2. Explain whether each scenario is a classification or regression problem, and indicate whether we are most interested in inference or prediction. Finally, provide n and p.
(a) We collect a set of data on the top 500 firms in the US. For each
firm we record profit, number of employees, industry and the
CEO salary. We are interested in understanding which factors
affect CEO salary.
(b) We are considering launching a new product and wish to know
whether it will be a success or a failure. We collect data on 20
similar products that were previously launched. For each product we have recorded whether it was a success or failure, price
charged for the product, marketing budget, competition price,
and ten other variables.
(c) We are interested in predicting the % change in the USD/Euro
exchange rate in relation to the weekly changes in the world
stock markets. Hence we collect weekly data for all of 2012. For
each week we record the % change in the USD/Euro, the %
change in the US market, the % change in the British market,
and the % change in the German market.
3. We now revisit the bias-variance decomposition.
(a) Provide a sketch of typical (squared) bias, variance, training error, test error, and Bayes (or irreducible) error curves, on a single plot, as we go from less flexible statistical learning methods
towards more flexible approaches. The x-axis should represent
the amount of flexibility in the method, and the y-axis should
represent the values for each curve. There should be five curves.
Make sure to label each one.
(b) Explain why each of the five curves has the shape displayed in
part (a).

64

2. Statistical Learning

4. You will now think of some real-life applications for statistical learning.
(a) Describe three real-life applications in which classification might
be useful. Describe the response, as well as the predictors. Is the
goal of each application inference or prediction? Explain your
answer.
(b) Describe three real-life applications in which regression might
be useful. Describe the response, as well as the predictors. Is the
goal of each application inference or prediction? Explain your
answer.
(c) Describe three real-life applications in which cluster analysis
might be useful.
5. What are the advantages and disadvantages of a very flexible (versus
a less flexible) approach for regression or classification? Under what
circumstances might a more flexible approach be preferred to a less
flexible approach? When might a less flexible approach be preferred?
6. Describe the differences between a parametric and a non-parametric
statistical learning approach. What are the advantages of a parametric approach to regression or classification (as opposed to a nonparametric approach)? What are its disadvantages?
7. The table below provides a training data set containing six observations, three predictors, and one qualitative response variable.
Obs.
1
2
3
4
5
6

X1
0
2
0
0
−1
1

X2
3
0
1
1
0
1

X3
0
0
3
2
1
1

Y
Red
Red
Red
Green
Green
Red

Suppose we wish to use this data set to make a prediction for Y when
X1 = X2 = X3 = 0 using K-nearest neighbors.
(a) Compute the Euclidean distance between each observation and
the test point, X1 = X2 = X3 = 0.
(b) What is our prediction with K = 1? Why?
(c) What is our prediction with K = 3? Why?
(d) If the Bayes decision boundary in this problem is highly nonlinear, then would we expect the best value for K to be large or
small? Why?

2.4 Exercises

65

Applied
8. This exercise relates to the College data set, which can be found in
the file College.csv on the book website. It contains a number of
variables for 777 different universities and colleges in the US. The
variables are
• Private : Public/private indicator
• Apps : Number of applications received
• Accept : Number of applicants accepted
• Enroll : Number of new students enrolled
• Top10perc : New students from top 10 % of high school class
• Top25perc : New students from top 25 % of high school class
• F.Undergrad : Number of full-time undergraduates
• P.Undergrad : Number of part-time undergraduates
• Outstate : Out-of-state tuition
• Room.Board : Room and board costs
• Books : Estimated book costs
• Personal : Estimated personal spending
• PhD : Percent of faculty with Ph.D.s
• Terminal : Percent of faculty with terminal degree
• S.F.Ratio : Student/faculty ratio
• perc.alumni : Percent of alumni who donate
• Expend : Instructional expenditure per student
• Grad.Rate : Graduation rate
Before reading the data into Python, it can be viewed in Excel or a
text editor.
(a) Use the pd.read_csv() function to read the data into Python. Call
the loaded data college. Make sure that you have the directory
set to the correct location for the data.
(b) Look at the data used in the notebook by creating and running
a new cell with just the code college in it. You should notice
that the first column is just the name of each university in a
column named something like Unnamed: 0. We don’t really want
pandas to treat this as data. However, it may be handy to have
these names for later. Try the following commands and similarly
look at the resulting data frames:
college2 = pd.read_csv('College.csv', index_col =0)
college3 = college.rename ({'Unnamed: 0': 'College '},
axis =1)
college3 = college3.set_index('College ')

66

2. Statistical Learning

This has used the first column in the file as an index for the
data frame. This means that pandas has given each row a name
corresponding to the appropriate university. Now you should see
that the first data column is Private. Note that the names of
the colleges appear on the left of the table. We also introduced
a new python object above: a dictionary, which is specified by
dictionary
(key, value) pairs. Keep your modified version of the data with
the following:
college = college3

(c) Use the describe() method of to produce a numerical summary
of the variables in the data set.
(d) Use the pd.plotting.scatter_matrix() function to produce a
scatterplot matrix of the first columns [Top10perc, Apps, Enroll].
Recall that you can reference a list C of columns of a data frame
A using A[C].
(e) Use the boxplot() method of college to produce side-by-side
boxplots of Outstate versus Private.
(f) Create a new qualitative variable, called Elite, by binning the
Top10perc variable into two groups based on whether or not the
proportion of students coming from the top 10% of their high
school classes exceeds 50%.
college['Elite '] = pd.cut(college['Top10perc '],
[0,0.5,1],
labels =['No', 'Yes'])

Use the value_counts() method of college['Elite'] to see how
many elite universities there are. Finally, use the boxplot() method
again to produce side-by-side boxplots of Outstate versus Elite.
(g) Use the plot.hist() method of college to produce some histograms with differing numbers of bins for a few of the quantitative variables. The command plt.subplots(2, 2) may be useful: it will divide the plot window into four regions so that four
plots can be made simultaneously. By changing the arguments
you can divide the screen up in other combinations.
(h) Continue exploring the data, and provide a brief summary of
what you discover.
9. This exercise involves the Auto data set studied in the lab. Make sure
that the missing values have been removed from the data.
(a) Which of the predictors are quantitative, and which are qualitative?
(b) What is the range of each quantitative predictor? You can answer this using the min() and max() methods in numpy.

.min()

(c) What is the mean and standard deviation of each quantitative .max()
predictor?

2.4 Exercises

67

(d) Now remove the 10th through 85th observations. What is the
range, mean, and standard deviation of each predictor in the
subset of the data that remains?
(e) Using the full data set, investigate the predictors graphically,
using scatterplots or other tools of your choice. Create some plots
highlighting the relationships among the predictors. Comment
on your findings.
(f) Suppose that we wish to predict gas mileage (mpg) on the basis
of the other variables. Do your plots suggest that any of the
other variables might be useful in predicting mpg? Justify your
answer.
10. This exercise involves the Boston housing data set.
(a) To begin, load in the Boston data set, which is part of the ISLP
library.
(b) How many rows are in this data set? How many columns? What
do the rows and columns represent?
(c) Make some pairwise scatterplots of the predictors (columns) in
this data set. Describe your findings.
(d) Are any of the predictors associated with per capita crime rate?
If so, explain the relationship.
(e) Do any of the suburbs of Boston appear to have particularly
high crime rates? Tax rates? Pupil-teacher ratios? Comment on
the range of each predictor.
(f) How many of the suburbs in this data set bound the Charles
river?
(g) What is the median pupil-teacher ratio among the towns in this
data set?
(h) Which suburb of Boston has lowest median value of owneroccupied homes? What are the values of the other predictors
for that suburb, and how do those values compare to the overall
ranges for those predictors? Comment on your findings.
(i) In this data set, how many of the suburbs average more than
seven rooms per dwelling? More than eight rooms per dwelling?
Comment on the suburbs that average more than eight rooms
per dwelling.

3
Linear Regression

This chapter is about linear regression, a very simple approach for supervised learning. In particular, linear regression is a useful tool for predicting
a quantitative response. It has been around for a long time and is the topic
of innumerable textbooks. Though it may seem somewhat dull compared to
some of the more modern statistical learning approaches described in later
chapters of this book, linear regression is still a useful and widely used statistical learning method. Moreover, it serves as a good jumping-off point for
newer approaches: as we will see in later chapters, many fancy statistical
learning approaches can be seen as generalizations or extensions of linear
regression. Consequently, the importance of having a good understanding
of linear regression before studying more complex learning methods cannot
be overstated. In this chapter, we review some of the key ideas underlying
the linear regression model, as well as the least squares approach that is
most commonly used to fit this model.
Recall the Advertising data from Chapter 2. Figure 2.1 displays sales
(in thousands of units) for a particular product as a function of advertising budgets (in thousands of dollars) for TV, radio, and newspaper media.
Suppose that in our role as statistical consultants we are asked to suggest,
on the basis of this data, a marketing plan for next year that will result in
high product sales. What information would be useful in order to provide
such a recommendation? Here are a few important questions that we might
seek to address:

1. Is there a relationship between advertising budget and sales?
Our first goal should be to determine whether the data provide evidence of an association between advertising expenditure and sales. If
the evidence is weak, then one might argue that no money should be
spent on advertising!
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_3

69

70

3. Linear Regression

2. How strong is the relationship between advertising budget and sales?
Assuming that there is a relationship between advertising and sales,
we would like to know the strength of this relationship. Does knowledge of the advertising budget provide a lot of information about
product sales?
3. Which media are associated with sales?
Are all three media—TV, radio, and newspaper—associated with
sales, or are just one or two of the media associated? To answer this
question, we must find a way to separate out the individual contribution of each medium to sales when we have spent money on all three
media.
4. How large is the association between each medium and sales?
For every dollar spent on advertising in a particular medium, by
what amount will sales increase? How accurately can we predict this
amount of increase?
5. How accurately can we predict future sales?
For any given level of television, radio, or newspaper advertising, what
is our prediction for sales, and what is the accuracy of this prediction?
6. Is the relationship linear?
If there is approximately a straight-line relationship between advertising expenditure in the various media and sales, then linear regression
is an appropriate tool. If not, then it may still be possible to transform the predictor or the response so that linear regression can be
used.
7. Is there synergy among the advertising media?
Perhaps spending $50,000 on television advertising and