riance of X for these two sets of companies was σ̂ 2 = 36. Finally,
80 % of companies issued dividends. Assuming that X follows a normal distribution, predict the probability that a company will issue
a dividend this year given that its percentage profit was X = 4 last
year.
Hint: Recall that the density function for a normal random variable
2
2
1
is f (x) = √2πσ
e−(x−µ) /2σ . You will need to use Bayes’ theorem.
2
8. Suppose that we take a data set, divide it into equally-sized training
and test sets, and then try out two different classification procedures.
First we use logistic regression and get an error rate of 20 % on the
training data and 30 % on the test data. Next we use 1-nearest neighbors (i.e. K = 1) and get an average error rate (averaged over both
test and training data sets) of 18 %. Based on these results, which
method should we prefer to use for classification of new observations?
Why?
9. This problem has to do with odds.
(a) On average, what fraction of people with an odds of 0.37 of
defaulting on their credit card payment will in fact default?
(b) Suppose that an individual has a 16 % chance of defaulting on
her credit card payment. What are the odds that she will default?

196

4. Classification

1
2
Pr(Y =k|X=x)
10. Equation 4.32 derived an expression for log Pr(Y
in the
=K|X=x)
setting where p > 1, so that the mean for the kth class, µk , is a pdimensional vector, and the shared covariance Σ is a p × p matrix.
However, in the setting with p = 1, (4.32) takes a simpler form, since
the means µ1 , . . . , µK and the variance σ 2 are scalars. In this simpler
setting, repeat the calculation in (4.32), and provide expressions for
ak and bkj in terms of πk , πK , µk , µK , and σ 2 .
11. Work out the detailed forms of ak , bkj , and bkjl in (4.33). Your answer
should involve πk , πK , µk , µK , Σk , and ΣK .
12. Suppose that you wish to classify an observation X ∈ R into apples
and oranges. You fit a logistic regression model and find that
6
Pr(Y
= orange|X = x) =

exp(β̂0 + β̂1 x)
1 + exp(β̂0 + β̂1 x)

.

Your friend fits a logistic regression model to the same data using the
softmax formulation in (4.13), and finds that
6
Pr(Y
= orange|X = x) =

exp(α̂orange0 + α̂orange1 x)
.
exp(α̂orange0 + α̂orange1 x) + exp(α̂apple0 + α̂apple1 x)

(a) What is the log odds of orange versus apple in your model?
(b) What is the log odds of orange versus apple in your friend’s
model?
(c) Suppose that in your model, β̂0 = 2 and β̂1 = −1. What are
the coefficient estimates in your friend’s model? Be as specific
as possible.
(d) Now suppose that you and your friend fit the same two models
on a different data set. This time, your friend gets the coefficient
estimates α̂orange0 = 1.2, α̂orange1 = −2, α̂orange0 = 3, α̂orange1 =
0.6. What are the coefficient estimates in your model?
(e) Finally, suppose you apply both models from (d) to a data set
with 2,000 test observations. What fraction of the time do you
expect the predicted class labels from your model to agree with
those from your friend’s model? Explain your answer.

Applied
13. This question should be answered using the Weekly data set, which
is part of the ISLP package. This data is similar in nature to the
Smarket data from this chapter’s lab, except that it contains 1, 089
weekly returns for 21 years, from the beginning of 1990 to the end of
2010.
(a) Produce some numerical and graphical summaries of the Weekly
data. Do there appear to be any patterns?

4.8 Exercises

197

(b) Use the full data set to perform a logistic regression with
Direction as the response and the five lag variables plus Volume
as predictors. Use the summary function to print the results. Do
any of the predictors appear to be statistically significant? If so,
which ones?
(c) Compute the confusion matrix and overall fraction of correct
predictions. Explain what the confusion matrix is telling you
about the types of mistakes made by logistic regression.
(d) Now fit the logistic regression model using a training data period
from 1990 to 2008, with Lag2 as the only predictor. Compute the
confusion matrix and the overall fraction of correct predictions
for the held out data (that is, the data from 2009 and 2010).
(e) Repeat (d) using LDA.
(f) Repeat (d) using QDA.
(g) Repeat (d) using KNN with K = 1.
(h) Repeat (d) using naive Bayes.
(i) Which of these methods appears to provide the best results on
this data?
(j) Experiment with different combinations of predictors, including possible transformations and interactions, for each of the
methods. Report the variables, method, and associated confusion matrix that appears to provide the best results on the held
out data. Note that you should also experiment with values for
K in the KNN classifier.
14. In this problem, you will develop a model to predict whether a given
car gets high or low gas mileage based on the Auto data set.
(a) Create a binary variable, mpg01, that contains a 1 if mpg contains
a value above its median, and a 0 if mpg contains a value below
its median. You can compute the median using the median()
method of the data frame. Note you may find it helpful to add
a column mpg01 to the data frame by assignment. Assuming you
have stored the data frame as Auto, this can be done as follows:
Auto['mpg01 '] = mpg01

(b) Explore the data graphically in order to investigate the association between mpg01 and the other features. Which of the other
features seem most likely to be useful in predicting mpg01? Scatterplots and boxplots may be useful tools to answer this question. Describe your findings.
(c) Split the data into a training set and a test set.
(d) Perform LDA on the training data in order to predict mpg01
using the variables that seemed most associated with mpg01 in
(b). What is the test error of the model obtained?

198

4. Classification

(e) Perform QDA on the training data in order to predict mpg01
using the variables that seemed most associated with mpg01 in
(b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
(f) Perform logistic regression on the training data in order to predict mpg01 using the variables that seemed most associated with
mpg01 in (b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
(g) Perform naive Bayes on the training data in order to predict
mpg01 using the variables that seemed most associated with mpg01
in (b). What is the test error of the model obtained?
(h) Perform KNN on the training data, with several values of K, in
order to predict mpg01. Use only the variables that seemed most
associated with mpg01 in (b). What test errors do you obtain?
Which value of K seems to perform the best on this data set?
15. This problem involves writing functions.
(a) Write a function, Power(), that prints out the result of raising 2
to the 3rd power. In other words, your function should compute
23 and print out the results.
Hint: Recall that x**a raises x to the power a. Use the print()
function to display the result.
(b) Create a new function, Power2(), that allows you to pass any
two numbers, x and a, and prints out the value of x**a. You can
do this by beginning your function with the line
def Power2(x, a):

You should be able to call your function by entering, for instance,
Power2 (3, 8)

on the command line. This should output the value of 38 , namely,
6, 561.
(c) Using the Power2() function that you just wrote, compute 103 ,
817 , and 1313 .
(d) Now create a new function, Power3(), that actually returns the
result x**a as a Python object, rather than simply printing it
to the screen. That is, if you store the value x**a in an object
called result within your function, then you can simply return return
this result, using the following line:
return result

Note that the line above should be the last line in your function,
and it should be indented 4 spaces.
(e) Now using the Power3() function, create a plot of f (x) = x2 .
The x-axis should display a range of integers from 1 to 10, and
the y-axis should display x2 . Label the axes appropriately, and
use an appropriate title for the figure. Consider displaying either
the x-axis, the y-axis, or both on the log-scale. You can do this
by using the ax.set_xscale() and ax.set_yscale() methods of
.set_xscale()
the axes you are plotting to.
.set_yscale()

4.8 Exercises

199

(f) Create a function, PlotPower(), that allows you to create a plot
of x against x**a for a fixed a and a sequence of values of x. For
instance, if you call
PlotPower(np.arange (1, 11), 3)

then a plot should be created with an x-axis taking on values
1, 2, . . . , 10, and a y-axis taking on values 13 , 23 , . . . , 103 .
16. Using the Boston data set, fit classification models in order to predict
whether a given suburb has a crime rate above or below the median.
Explore logistic regression, LDA, naive Bayes, and KNN models using
various subsets of the predictors. Describe your findings.
Hint: You will have to create the response variable yourself, using the
variables that are contained in the Boston data set.

5
Resampling Methods

Resampling methods are an indispensable tool in modern statistics. They
involve repeatedly drawing samples from a training set and refitting a model
of interest on each sample in order to obtain additional information about
the fitted model. For example, in order to estimate the variability of a linear
regression fit, we can repeatedly draw different samples from the training
data, fit a linear regression to each new sample, and then examine the
extent to which the resulting fits differ. Such an approach may allow us to
obtain information that would not be available from fitting the model only
once using the original training sample.
Resampling approaches can be computationally expensive, because they
involve fitting the same statistical method multiple times using different
subsets of the training data. However, due to recent advances in computing
power, the computational requirements of resampling methods generally
are not prohibitive. In this chapter, we discuss two of the most commonly
used resampling methods, cross-validation and the bootstrap. Both methods
are important tools in the practical application of many statistical learning
procedures. For example, cross-validation can be used to estimate the test
error associated with a given statistical learning method in order to evaluate
its performance, or to select the appropriate level of flexibility. The process
of evaluating a model’s performance is known as model assessment, whereas
model
the process of selecting the proper level of flexibility for a model is known as assessment
model selection. The bootstrap is used in several contexts, most commonly
model
to provide a measure of accuracy of a parameter estimate or of a given selection
statistical learning method.

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_5

201

202

5. Resampling Methods

5.1

Cross-Validation

In Chapter 2 we discuss the distinction between the test error rate and the
training error rate. The test error is the average error that results from using
a statistical learning method to predict the response on a new observation—
that is, a measurement that was not used in training the method. Given
a data set, the use of a particular statistical learning method is warranted
if it results in a low test error. The test error can be easily calculated if a
designated test set is available. Unfortunately, this is usually not the case.
In contrast, the training error can be easily calculated by applying the
statistical learning method to the observations used in its training. But as
we saw in Chapter 2, the training error rate often is quite different from the
test error rate, and in particular the former can dramatically underestimate
the latter.
In the absence of a very large designated test set that can be used to
directly estimate the test error rate, a number of techniques can be used
to estimate this quantity using the available training data. Some methods
make a mathematical adjustment to the training error rate in order to
estimate the test error rate. Such approaches are discussed in Chapter 6.
In this section, we instead consider a class of methods that estimate the
test error rate by holding out a subset of the training observations from the
fitting process, and then applying the statistical learning method to those
held out observations.
In Sections 5.1.1–5.1.4, for simplicity we assume that we are interested
in performing regression with a quantitative response. In Section 5.1.5 we
consider the case of classification with a qualitative response. As we will
see, the key concepts remain the same regardless of whether the response
is quantitative or qualitative.

5.1.1

The Validation Set Approach

Suppose that we would like to estimate the test error associated with fitting a particular statistical learning method on a set of observations. The
validation set approach, displayed in Figure 5.1, is a very simple strategy
validation
for this task. It involves randomly dividing the available set of observa- set approach
tions into two parts, a training set and a validation set or hold-out set. The
validation
model is fit on the training set, and the fitted model is used to predict the set
responses for the observations in the validation set. The resulting validation hold-out set
set error rate—typically assessed using MSE in the case of a quantitative
response—provides an estimate of the test error rate.
We illustrate the validation set approach on the Auto data set. Recall from
Chapter 3 that there appears to be a non-linear relationship between mpg
and horsepower, and that a model that predicts mpg using horsepower and
horsepower2 gives better results than a model that uses only a linear term.
It is natural to wonder whether a cubic or higher-order fit might provide
even better results. We answer this question in Chapter 3 by looking at
the p-values associated with a cubic term and higher-order polynomial
terms in a linear regression. But we could also answer this question using
the validation method. We randomly split the 392 observations into two

5.1 Cross-Validation

203

!"#"$""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""%"

&""##""!$"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""'!"

FIGURE 5.1. A schematic display of the validation set approach. A set of n
observations are randomly split into a training set (shown in blue, containing
observations 7, 22, and 13, among others) and a validation set (shown in beige,
and containing observation 91, among others). The statistical learning method is
fit on the training set, and its performance is evaluated on the validation set.

sets, a training set containing 196 of the data points, and a validation set
containing the remaining 196 observations. The validation set error rates
that result from fitting various regression models on the training sample
and evaluating their performance on the validation sample, using MSE
as a measure of validation set error, are shown in the left-hand panel of
Figure 5.2. The validation set MSE for the quadratic fit is considerably
smaller than for the linear fit. However, the validation set MSE for the cubic
fit is actually slightly larger than for the quadratic fit. This implies that
includ