simple assumption is that f is linear in
X:
f (X) = β0 + β1 X1 + β2 X2 + · · · + βp Xp .
(2.4)

This is a linear model, which will be discussed extensively in Chapter 3. Once we have assumed that f is linear, the problem of estimating f is greatly simplified. Instead of having to estimate an entirely
arbitrary p-dimensional function f (X), one only needs to estimate
the p + 1 coefficients β0 , β1 , . . . , βp .

parametric

2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?

21

rs

of

Se
ni
or

ity

e
Incom

Ye
a

Ed

uc

ati

on

FIGURE 2.4. A linear model fit by least squares to the Income data from
Figure 2.3. The observations are shown in red, and the yellow plane indicates the
least squares fit to the data.

2. After a model has been selected, we need a procedure that uses the
training data to fit or train the model. In the case of the linear model
fit
(2.4), we need to estimate the parameters β0 , β1 , . . . , βp . That is, we train
want to find values of these parameters such that
Y ≈ β 0 + β 1 X1 + β2 X2 + · · · + βp Xp .

The most common approach to fitting the model (2.4) is referred to
as (ordinary) least squares, which we discuss in Chapter 3. However,
least squares
least squares is one of many possible ways to fit the linear model. In
Chapter 6, we discuss other approaches for estimating the parameters
in (2.4).
The model-based approach just described is referred to as parametric;
it reduces the problem of estimating f down to one of estimating a set of
parameters. Assuming a parametric form for f simplifies the problem of
estimating f because it is generally much easier to estimate a set of parameters, such as β0 , β1 , . . . , βp in the linear model (2.4), than it is to fit
an entirely arbitrary function f . The potential disadvantage of a parametric approach is that the model we choose will usually not match the true
unknown form of f . If the chosen model is too far from the true f , then
our estimate will be poor. We can try to address this problem by choosing flexible models that can fit many different possible functional forms
flexible
for f . But in general, fitting a more flexible model requires estimating a
greater number of parameters. These more complex models can lead to a
phenomenon known as overfitting the data, which essentially means they
overfitting
follow the errors, or noise, too closely. These issues are discussed throughnoise
out this book.
Figure 2.4 shows an example of the parametric approach applied to the
Income data from Figure 2.3. We have fit a linear model of the form
income ≈ β0 + β1 × education + β2 × seniority.

22

2. Statistical Learning

rs

of

Se
ni
or

ity

e

Incom

Ye
a

Ed

uc

ati

on

FIGURE 2.5. A smooth thin-plate spline fit to the Income data from Figure 2.3
is shown in yellow; the observations are displayed in red. Splines are discussed in
Chapter 7.

Since we have assumed a linear relationship between the response and the
two predictors, the entire fitting problem reduces to estimating β0 , β1 , and
β2 , which we do using least squares linear regression. Comparing Figure 2.3
to Figure 2.4, we can see that the linear fit given in Figure 2.4 is not quite
right: the true f has some curvature that is not captured in the linear fit.
However, the linear fit still appears to do a reasonable job of capturing the
positive relationship between years of education and income, as well as the
slightly less positive relationship between seniority and income. It may be
that with such a small number of observations, this is the best we can do.
Non-Parametric Methods
Non-parametric methods do not make explicit assumptions about the functional form of f . Instead they seek an estimate of f that gets as close to the
data points as possible without being too rough or wiggly. Such approaches
can have a major advantage over parametric approaches: by avoiding the
assumption of a particular functional form for f , they have the potential
to accurately fit a wider range of possible shapes for f . Any parametric
approach brings with it the possibility that the functional form used to
estimate f is very different from the true f , in which case the resulting
model will not fit the data well. In contrast, non-parametric approaches
completely avoid this danger, since essentially no assumption about the
form of f is made. But non-parametric approaches do suffer from a major
disadvantage: since they do not reduce the problem of estimating f to a
small number of parameters, a very large number of observations (far more
than is typically needed for a parametric approach) is required in order to
obtain an accurate estimate for f .
An example of a non-parametric approach to fitting the Income data is
shown in Figure 2.5. A thin-plate spline is used to estimate f . This apthin-plate
proach does not impose any pre-specified model on f . It instead attempts spline

2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?

23

rs

of

Se
ni
or

ity

e

Incom

Ye
a

Ed

uc

ati

on

FIGURE 2.6. A rough thin-plate spline fit to the Income data from Figure 2.3.
This fit makes zero errors on the training data.

to produce an estimate for f that is as close as possible to the observed
data, subject to the fit—that is, the yellow surface in Figure 2.5—being
smooth. In this case, the non-parametric fit has produced a remarkably accurate estimate of the true f shown in Figure 2.3. In order to fit a thin-plate
spline, the data analyst must select a level of smoothness. Figure 2.6 shows
the same thin-plate spline fit using a lower level of smoothness, allowing
for a rougher fit. The resulting estimate fits the observed data perfectly!
However, the spline fit shown in Figure 2.6 is far more variable than the
true function f , from Figure 2.3. This is an example of overfitting the
data, which we discussed previously. It is an undesirable situation because
the fit obtained will not yield accurate estimates of the response on new
observations that were not part of the original training data set. We discuss methods for choosing the correct amount of smoothness in Chapter 5.
Splines are discussed in Chapter 7.
As we have seen, there are advantages and disadvantages to parametric
and non-parametric methods for statistical learning. We explore both types
of methods throughout this book.

2.1.3

The Trade-Off Between Prediction Accuracy and Model
Interpretability

Of the many methods that we examine in this book, some are less flexible,
or more restrictive, in the sense that they can produce just a relatively
small range of shapes to estimate f . For example, linear regression is a
relatively inflexible approach, because it can only generate linear functions
such as the lines shown in Figure 2.1 or the plane shown in Figure 2.4.
Other methods, such as the thin plate splines shown in Figures 2.5 and 2.6,
are considerably more flexible because they can generate a much wider
range of possible shapes to estimate f .

2. Statistical Learning

High

24

Subset Selection
Lasso

Interpretability

Least Squares
Generalized Additive Models
Trees

Bagging, Boosting

Low

Support Vector Machines
Deep Learning

Low

High

Flexibility

FIGURE 2.7. A representation of the tradeoff between flexibility and interpretability, using different statistical learning methods. In general, as the flexibility
of a method increases, its interpretability decreases.

One might reasonably ask the following question: why would we ever
choose to use a more restrictive method instead of a very flexible approach?
There are several reasons that we might prefer a more restrictive model.
If we are mainly interested in inference, then restrictive models are much
more interpretable. For instance, when inference is the goal, the linear
model may be a good choice since it will be quite easy to understand
the relationship between Y and X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp . In contrast, very flexible
approaches, such as the splines discussed in Chapter 7 and displayed in
Figures 2.5 and 2.6, and the boosting methods discussed in Chapter 8, can
lead to such complicated estimates of f that it is difficult to understand
how any individual predictor is associated with the response.
Figure 2.7 provides an illustration of the trade-off between flexibility and
interpretability for some of the methods that we cover in this book. Least
squares linear regression, discussed in Chapter 3, is relatively inflexible but
is quite interpretable. The lasso, discussed in Chapter 6, relies upon the
lasso
linear model (2.4) but uses an alternative fitting procedure for estimating
the coefficients β0 , β1 , . . . , βp . The new procedure is more restrictive in estimating the coefficients, and sets a number of them to exactly zero. Hence
in this sense the lasso is a less flexible approach than linear regression.
It is also more interpretable than linear regression, because in the final
model the response variable will only be related to a small subset of the
predictors—namely, those with nonzero coefficient estimates. Generalized
additive models (GAMs), discussed in Chapter 7, instead extend the lingeneralized
ear model (2.4) to allow for certain non-linear relationships. Consequently, additive
GAMs are more flexible than linear regression. They are also somewhat model
less interpretable than linear regression, because the relationship between
each predictor and the response is now modeled using a curve. Finally,
fully non-linear methods such as bagging, boosting, support vector machines
bagging
with non-linear kernels, and neural networks (deep learning), discussed in
boosting
Chapters 8, 9, and 10, are highly flexible approaches that are harder to
support
interpret.
vector
machine

2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?

25

We have established that when inference is the goal, there are clear advantages to using simple and relatively inflexible statistical learning methods. In some settings, however, we are only interested in prediction, and
the interpretability of the predictive model is simply not of interest. For
instance, if we seek to develop an algorithm to predict the price of a
stock, our sole requirement for the algorithm is that it predict accurately—
interpretability is not a concern. In this setting, we might expect that it
will be best to use the most flexible model available. Surprisingly, this is
not always the case! We will often obtain more accurate predictions using
a less flexible method. This phenomenon, which may seem counterintuitive at first glance, has to do with the potential for overfitting in highly
flexible methods. We saw an example of overfitting in Figure 2.6. We will
discuss this very important concept further in Section 2.2 and throughout
this book.

2.1.4

Supervised Versus Unsupervised Learning

Most statistical learning problems fall into one of two categories: supervised
supervised
or unsupervised. The examples that we have discussed so far in this chapunsupervised
ter all fall into the supervised learning domain. For each observation of the
predictor measurement(s) xi , i = 1, . . . , n there is an associated response
measurement yi . We wish to fit a model that relates the response to the
predictors, with the aim of accurately predicting the response for future
observations (prediction) or better understanding the relationship between
the response and the predictors (inference). Many classical statistical learning methods such as linear regression and logistic regression (Chapter 4), as
logistic
well as more modern approaches such as GAM, boosting, and support vec- regression
tor machines, operate in the supervised learning domain. The vast majority
of this book is devoted to this setting.
By contrast, unsupervised learning describes the somewhat more challenging situation in which for every observation i = 1, . . . , n, we observe
a vector of measurements xi but no associated response yi . It is not possible to fit a linear regression model, since there is no response variable
to predict. In this setting, we are in some sense working blind; the situation is referred to as unsupervised because we lack a response variable that can supervise our analysis. What sort of statistical analysis is
possible? We can seek to understand the relationships between the variables
or between the observations. One statistical learning tool that we may use
in this setting is cluster analysis, or clustering. The goal of cluster analysis
cluster
is to ascertain, on the basis of x1 , . . . , xn , whether the observations fall into analysis
relatively distinct groups. For example, in a market segmentation study we
might observe multiple characteristics (variables) for potential customers,
such as zip code, family income, and shopping habits. We might believe
that the customers fall into different groups, such as big spenders versus
low spenders. If the information about each customer’s spending patterns
were available, then a supervised analysis would be possible. However, this
information is not available—that is, we do not know whether each potential customer is a big spender or not. In this setting, we can try to cluster
the customers on the basis of the variables measured, in order to identify

2. Statistical Learning

6

X2

2

2

4

4

6

X2

8

10

8

12

26

0

2

4

6

X1

8

10

12

0

2

4

6

X1

FIGURE 2.8. A clustering data set involving three groups. Each group is
shown using a different colored symbol. Left: The three groups are well-separated.
In this setting, a clustering approach should successfully identify the three groups.
Right: There is some overlap among the groups. Now the clustering task is more
challenging.

distinct groups of potential customers. Identifying such groups can be of
interest because it might be that the groups differ with respect to some
property of interest, such as spending habits.
Figure 2.8 provides a simple illustration of the clustering problem. We
have plotted 150 observations with measurements on two variables, X1
and X2 . Each observation corresponds to one of three distinct groups. For
illustrative purposes, we have plotted the members of each group using
different colors and symbols. However, in practice the group memberships
are unknown, and the goal is to determine the group to which each observation belongs. In the left-hand panel of Figure 2.8, this is a relatively easy
task because the groups are well-separated. By contrast, the right-hand
panel illustrates a more challenging setting in which there is some overlap
between the groups. A clustering method could not be expected to assign
all of the overlapping points to their correct group (blue, green, or orange).
In the examples shown in Figure 2.8, there are only two variables, and
so one can simply visually inspect the scatterplots of the observations in
order to identify clusters. However, in practice, we often encounter data
sets that contain many more than two variables. In this case, we cannot
easily plot the observations. For instance, if there are p variables in our
data set, then p(p − 1)/2 distinct scatterplots can be made, and visual
inspection is simply not a viable way to identify clusters. For this reason,
automated clustering methods are important. We discuss clustering and
other unsupervised learning approaches in Chapter 12.
Many problems fall naturally into the supervised or unsupervised learning paradigms. However, sometimes the question of whether an analysis
should be considered supervised or unsupervised is less clear-cut. For instance, suppose that we have a set of n observat