 coefficient estimate for newspaper
in the multiple regression model is close to zero, and the corresponding pvalue is no longer significant, with a value around 0.86. This illustrates that
the simple and multiple regression coefficients can be quite different. This
difference stems from the fact that in the simple regression case, the slope
term represents the average increase in product sales associated with a
$1,000 increase in newspaper advertising, ignoring other predictors such as
TV and radio. By contrast, in the multiple regression setting, the coefficient
for newspaper represents the average increase in product sales associated
with increasing newspaper spending by $1,000 while holding TV and radio
fixed.
Does it make sense for the multiple regression to suggest no relationship
between sales and newspaper while the simple linear regression implies the

3.2 Multiple Linear Regression

Intercept
TV
radio
newspaper

Coefficient
2.939
0.046
0.189
−0.001

Std. error
0.3119
0.0014
0.0086
0.0059

t-statistic
9.42
32.81
21.89
−0.18

83

p-value
< 0.0001
< 0.0001
< 0.0001
0.8599

TABLE 3.4. For the Advertising data, least squares coefficient estimates of the
multiple linear regression of number of units sold on TV, radio, and newspaper
advertising budgets.
TV

TV
radio
newspaper
sales

1.0000

radio

0.0548
1.0000

newspaper

0.0567
0.3541
1.0000

sales

0.7822
0.5762
0.2283
1.0000

TABLE 3.5. Correlation matrix for TV, radio, newspaper, and sales for the
Advertising data.

opposite? In fact it does. Consider the correlation matrix for the three
predictor variables and response variable, displayed in Table 3.5. Notice
that the correlation between radio and newspaper is 0.35. This indicates
that markets with high newspaper advertising tend to also have high radio advertising. Now suppose that the multiple regression is correct and
newspaper advertising is not associated with sales, but radio advertising
is associated with sales. Then in markets where we spend more on radio
our sales will tend to be higher, and as our correlation matrix shows, we
also tend to spend more on newspaper advertising in those same markets. Hence, in a simple linear regression which only examines sales versus
newspaper, we will observe that higher values of newspaper tend to be associated with higher values of sales, even though newspaper advertising is
not directly associated with sales. So newspaper advertising is a surrogate
for radio advertising; newspaper gets “credit” for the association between
radio on sales.
This slightly counterintuitive result is very common in many real life
situations. Consider an absurd example to illustrate the point. Running
a regression of shark attacks versus ice cream sales for data collected at
a given beach community over a period of time would show a positive
relationship, similar to that seen between sales and newspaper. Of course
no one has (yet) suggested that ice creams should be banned at beaches
to reduce shark attacks. In reality, higher temperatures cause more people
to visit the beach, which in turn results in more ice cream sales and more
shark attacks. A multiple regression of shark attacks onto ice cream sales
and temperature reveals that, as intuition implies, ice cream sales is no
longer a significant predictor after adjusting for temperature.

3.2.2

Some Important Questions

When we perform multiple linear regression, we usually are interested in
answering a few important questions.

84

3. Linear Regression

1. Is at least one of the predictors X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp useful in predicting
the response?
2. Do all the predictors help to explain Y , or is only a subset of the
predictors useful?
3. How well does the model fit the data?
4. Given a set of predictor values, what response value should we predict,
and how accurate is our prediction?
We now address each of these questions in turn.
One: Is There a Relationship Between the Response and Predictors?
Recall that in the simple linear regression setting, in order to determine
whether there is a relationship between the response and the predictor we
can simply check whether β1 = 0. In the multiple regression setting with p
predictors, we need to ask whether all of the regression coefficients are zero,
i.e. whether β1 = β2 = · · · = βp = 0. As in the simple linear regression
setting, we use a hypothesis test to answer this question. We test the null
hypothesis,
H0 : β 1 = β 2 = · · · = β p = 0
versus the alternative

Ha : at least one βj is non-zero.
This hypothesis test is performed by computing the F -statistic,
F =

(TSS − RSS)/p
,
RSS/(n − p − 1)

F -statistic

(3.23)

)
where,
as with simple linear regression, TSS =
(yi − ȳ)2 and RSS =
)
2
(yi − ŷi ) . If the linear model assumptions are correct, one can show that
E{RSS/(n − p − 1)} = σ 2

and that, provided H0 is true,
E{(TSS − RSS)/p} = σ 2 .
Hence, when there is no relationship between the response and predictors,
one would expect the F -statistic to take on a value close to 1. On the other
hand, if Ha is true, then E{(TSS − RSS)/p} > σ 2 , so we expect F to be
greater than 1.
The F -statistic for the multiple linear regression model obtained by regressing sales onto radio, TV, and newspaper is shown in Table 3.6. In this
example the F -statistic is 570. Since this is far larger than 1, it provides
compelling evidence against the null hypothesis H0 . In other words, the
large F -statistic suggests that at least one of the advertising media must
be related to sales. However, what if the F -statistic had been closer to
1? How large does the F -statistic need to be before we can reject H0 and

3.2 Multiple Linear Regression

Quantity
Residual standard error
R2
F -statistic

85

Value
1.69
0.897
570

TABLE 3.6. More information about the least squares model for the regression
of number of units sold on TV, newspaper, and radio advertising budgets in the
Advertising data. Other information about this model was displayed in Table 3.4.

conclude that there is a relationship? It turns out that the answer depends
on the values of n and p. When n is large, an F -statistic that is just a
little larger than 1 might still provide evidence against H0 . In contrast,
a larger F -statistic is needed to reject H0 if n is small. When H0 is true
and the errors "i have a normal distribution, the F -statistic follows an
F -distribution.6 For any given value of n and p, any statistical software
package can be used to compute the p-value associated with the F -statistic
using this distribution. Based on this p-value, we can determine whether
or not to reject H0 . For the advertising data, the p-value associated with
the F -statistic in Table 3.6 is essentially zero, so we have extremely strong
evidence that at least one of the media is associated with increased sales.
In (3.23) we are testing H0 that all the coefficients are zero. Sometimes
we want to test that a particular subset of q of the coefficients are zero.
This corresponds to a null hypothesis
H0 :

βp−q+1 = βp−q+2 = · · · = βp = 0,

where for convenience we have put the variables chosen for omission at the
end of the list. In this case we fit a second model that uses all the variables
except those last q. Suppose that the residual sum of squares for that model
is RSS0 . Then the appropriate F -statistic is
F =

(RSS0 − RSS)/q
.
RSS/(n − p − 1)

(3.24)

Notice that in Table 3.4, for each individual predictor a t-statistic and
a p-value were reported. These provide information about whether each
individual predictor is related to the response, after adjusting for the other
predictors. It turns out that each of these is exactly equivalent7 to the F test that omits that single variable from the model, leaving all the others
in—i.e. q=1 in (3.24). So it reports the partial effect of adding that variable
to the model. For instance, as we discussed earlier, these p-values indicate
that TV and radio are related to sales, but that there is no evidence that
newspaper is associated with sales, when TV and radio are held fixed.
Given these individual p-values for each variable, why do we need to look
at the overall F -statistic? After all, it seems likely that if any one of the
p-values for the individual variables is very small, then at least one of the
predictors is related to the response. However, this logic is flawed, especially
when the number of predictors p is large.
6 Even if the errors are not normally-distributed, the F -statistic approximately follows
an F -distribution provided that the sample size n is large.
7 The square of each t-statistic is the corresponding F -statistic.

86

3. Linear Regression

For instance, consider an example in which p = 100 and H0 : β1 = β2 =
· · · = βp = 0 is true, so no variable is truly associated with the response. In
this situation, about 5 % of the p-values associated with each variable (of
the type shown in Table 3.4) will be below 0.05 by chance. In other words,
we expect to see approximately five small p-values even in the absence of
any true association between the predictors and the response.8 In fact, it
is likely that we will observe at least one p-value below 0.05 by chance!
Hence, if we use the individual t-statistics and associated p-values in order
to decide whether or not there is any association between the variables and
the response, there is a very high chance that we will incorrectly conclude
that there is a relationship. However, the F -statistic does not suffer from
this problem because it adjusts for the number of predictors. Hence, if H0
is true, there is only a 5 % chance that the F -statistic will result in a pvalue below 0.05, regardless of the number of predictors or the number of
observations.
The approach of using an F -statistic to test for any association between
the predictors and the response works when p is relatively small, and certainly small compared to n. However, sometimes we have a very large number of variables. If p > n then there are more coefficients βj to estimate
than observations from which to estimate them. In this case we cannot
even fit the multiple linear regression model using least squares, so the F statistic cannot be used, and neither can most of the other concepts that
we have seen so far in this chapter. When p is large, some of the approaches
discussed in the next section, such as forward selection, can be used. This
high-dimensional setting is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.

highdimensional

Two: Deciding on Important Variables
As discussed in the previous section, the first step in a multiple regression
analysis is to compute the F -statistic and to examine the associated pvalue. If we conclude on the basis of that p-value that at least one of the
predictors is related to the response, then it is natural to wonder which are
the guilty ones! We could look at the individual p-values as in Table 3.4,
but as discussed (and as further explored in Chapter 13), if p is large we
are likely to make some false discoveries.
It is possible that all of the predictors are associated with the response,
but it is more often the case that the response is only associated with
a subset of the predictors. The task of determining which predictors are
associated with the response, in order to fit a single model involving only
those predictors, is referred to as variable selection. The variable selection
variable
problem is studied extensively in Chapter 6, and so here we will provide selection
only a brief outline of some classical approaches.
Ideally, we would like to perform variable selection by trying out a lot of
different models, each containing a different subset of the predictors. For
instance, if p = 2, then we can consider four models: (1) a model containing no variables, (2) a model containing X1 only, (3) a model containing
8 This is related to the important concept of multiple testing, which is the focus of
Chapter 13.

3.2 Multiple Linear Regression

87

X2 only, and (4) a model containing both X1 and X2 . We can then select the best model out of all of the models that we have considered. How
do we determine which model is best? Various statistics can be used to
judge the quality of a model. These include Mallow’s Cp , Akaike informaMallow’s Cp
tion criterion (AIC), Bayesian information criterion (BIC), and adjusted
Akaike
R2 . These are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. We can also deter- information
mine which model is best by plotting various model outputs, such as the criterion
residuals, in order to search for patterns.
Bayesian
Unfortunately, there are a total of 2p models that contain subsets of p information
variables. This means that even for moderate p, trying out every possible criterion
2
subset of the predictors is infeasible. For instance, we saw that if p = 2, then adjusted R
2
there are 2 = 4 models to consider. But if p = 30, then we must consider
230 = 1,073,741,824 models! This is not practical. Therefore, unless p is very
small, we cannot consider all 2p models, and instead we need an automated
and efficient approach to choose a smaller set of models to consider. There
are three classical approaches for this task:
• Forward selection. We begin with the null model—a model that conforward
tains an intercept but no predictors. We then fit p simple linear re- selection
gressions and add to the null model the variable that results in the null model
lowest RSS. We then add to that model the variable that results
in the lowest RSS for the new two-variable model. This approach is
continued until some stopping rule is satisfied.
• Backward selection. We start with all variables in the model, and
backward
remove the variable with the largest p-value—that is, the variable selection
that is the least statistically significant. The new (p − 1)-variable
model is fit, and the variable with the largest p-value is removed. This
procedure continues until a stopping rule is reached. For instance, we
may stop when all remaining variables have a p-value below some
threshold.
• Mixed selection. This is a combination of forward and backward semixed
lection. We start with no variables in the model, and as with forward selection
selection, we add the variable that provides the best fit. We continue to add variables one-by-one. Of course, as we noted with the
Advertising example, the p-values for variables can become larger as
new predictors are added to the model. Hence, if at any point the
p-value for one of the variables in the model rises above a certain
threshold, then we remove that variable from the model. We continue to perform these forward and backward steps until all variables
in the model have a sufficiently low p-value, and all variables outside
the model would have a large p-value if added to the model.
Backward selection cannot be used if p > n, while forward selection can
always be used. Forward selection is a greedy approach, and might include
variables early that later become redundant. Mixed selection can remedy
this.

88

3. Linear Regression

Three: Model Fit
Two of the most common numerical measures of model fit are the RSE and
R2 , the fraction of variance explained. These quantities are computed and
interpreted in the same fashion as for simple linear regression.
Recall that in simple regression, R2 is the square of the correlation of the
response and the variable. In multiple linear regression, it turns out that it
equals Cor(Y, Ŷ )2 , the square of the correlation between the response and
the fitted linear model