comes from a different distribution than the dev/test set, we 
still want to use it for learning since it can provide a lot of information. 

For the cat detector example, instead of putting all 10,000 user-uploaded images into the 
dev/test sets, we might instead put 5,000 into the dev/test sets. We can put the remaining 
5,000 user-uploaded examples into the training set. This way, your training set of 205,000 
examples contains some data that comes from your dev/test distribution along with the 
200,000 internet images. We will discuss in a later chapter why this method is helpful.  

Let’s consider a second example. Suppose you are building a speech recognition system to 
transcribe street addresses for a voice-controlled mobile map/navigation app. You have 
20,000 examples of users speaking street addresses. But you also have 500,000 examples of 
other audio clips with users speaking about other topics. You might take 10,000 examples of 
street addresses for the dev/test sets, and use the remaining 10,000, plus the additional 
500,000 examples, for training.  

We will continue to assume that your dev data and your test data come from the same 
distribution. But it is important to understand that different training and dev/test 
distributions offer some special challenges.  

Page 72



Andrew Ng 

 
 
 
37 How to decide whether to use all your data 

Suppose your cat detector’s training set includes 10,000 user-uploaded images. This data 
comes from the same distribution as a separate dev/test set, and represents the distribution 
you care about doing well on. You also have an additional 20,000 images downloaded from 
the internet. Should you provide all 20,000+10,000=30,000 images to your learning 
algorithm as its training set, or discard the 20,000 internet images for fear of it biasing your 
learning algorithm?  

When using earlier generations of learning algorithms (such as hand-designed computer 
vision features, followed by a simple linear classifier) there was a real risk that merging both 
types of data would cause you to perform worse. Thus, some engineers will warn you against 
including the 20,000 internet images. 

But in the modern era of powerful, flexible learning algorithms—such as large neural 
networks—this risk has greatly diminished. If you can afford to build a neural network with a 
large enough number of hidden units/layers, you can safely add the 20,000 images to your 
training set. Adding the images is more likely to increase your performance.  

This observation relies on the fact that there is some x —> y mapping that works well for 
both types of data. In other words, there exists some system that inputs either an internet 
image or a mobile app image and reliably predicts the label, even without knowing the 
source of the image.  

Adding the additional 20,000 images has the following effects: 

1. It gives your neural network more examples of what cats do/do not look like. This is 
helpful, since internet images and user-uploaded mobile app images do share some 
similarities. Your neural network can apply some of the knowledge acquired from internet 
images to mobile app images.  

2. It forces the neural network to expend some of its capacity to learn about properties that 
are specific to internet images (such as higher resolution, different distributions of how 
the images are framed, etc.) If these properties differ greatly from mobile app images, it 
will “use up” some of the representational capacity of the neural network. Thus there is 
less capacity for recognizing data drawn from the distribution of mobile app images, 
which is what you really care about. Theoretically, this could hurt your algorithms’ 
performance.  

Page 73



Andrew Ng 

 
 
To describe the second effect in different terms, we can turn to the fictional character 
Sherlock Holmes, who says that your brain is like an attic; it only has a finite amount of 
space. He says that “for every addition of knowledge, you forget something that you knew 
before. It is of the highest importance, therefore, not to have useless facts elbowing out the 
12
useful ones.”   

Fortunately, if you have the computational capacity needed to build a big enough neural 
network—i.e., a big enough attic—then this is not a serious concern. You have enough 
capacity to learn from both internet and from mobile app images, without the two types of 
data competing for capacity. Your algorithm’s “brain” is big enough that you don’t have to 
worry about running out of attic space.  

But if you do not have a big enough neural network (or another highly flexible learning 
algorithm), then you should pay more attention to your training data matching your dev/test 
set distribution.  

If you think you have data that has no benefit,you should just leave out that data for 
computational reasons. For example, suppose your dev/test sets contain mainly casual 
pictures of people, places, landmarks, animals. Suppose you also have a large collection of 
scanned historical documents:  

These documents don’t contain anything resembling a cat. They also look completely unlike 
your dev/test distribution. There is no point including this data as negative examples, 
because the benefit from the first effect above is negligible—there is almost nothing your 
neural network can learn from this data that it can apply to your dev/test set distribution. 
Including them would waste computation resources and representation capacity of the 
neural network.  

12 

A Study in Scarlet
​

by Arthur Conan Doyle 

Page 74



Andrew Ng 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
​
38 How to decide whether to include 
inconsistent data 

Suppose you want to learn to predict housing prices in New York City. Given the size of a 
house (input feature x), you want to predict the price (target label y).  

Housing prices in New York City are very high. Suppose you have a second dataset of 
housing prices in Detroit, Michigan, where housing prices are much lower. Should you 
include this data in your training set?  

Given the same size x, the price of a house y is very different depending on whether it is in 
New York City or in Detroit. If you only care about predicting New York City housing prices, 
putting the two datasets together will hurt your performance.  In this case, it would be better 
to leave out the inconsistent Detroit data.

13

How is this New York City vs. Detroit example different from the  mobile app vs. internet cat 
images example? 

The cat image example is different because, given an input picture x, one can reliably predict 
the label y indicating whether there is a cat, even without knowing if the image is an internet 
image or a mobile app image. I.e., there is a function f(x) that reliably maps from the input x 
to the target output y, even without knowing the origin of x. Thus, the task of recognition 
from internet images is “consistent” with the task of recognition from mobile app images. 
This means there was little downside (other than computational cost) to including all the 
data, and some possible significant upside. In contrast, New York City and Detroit, Michigan 
data are not consistent. Given the same x (size of house), the price is very different 
depending on where the house is.  

13 There is one way to address the problem of Detroit data being inconsistent with New York City 
data, which is to add an extra feature to each training example indicating the city. Given an input 
x—which now specifies the city—the target value of y is now unambiguous. However, in practice I do 
not see this done frequently.  

Page 75



Andrew Ng 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 Weighting data  

Suppose you have 200,000 images from the internet and 5,000 images from your mobile 
app users. There is a 40:1 ratio between the size of these datasets. In theory, so long as you 
build a huge neural network and train it long enough on all 205,000 images, there is no 
harm in trying to make the algorithm do well on both internet images and mobile images.  

But in practice, having 40x as many internet images as mobile app images might mean you 
need to spend 40x (or more) as much computational resources to model both, compared to if 
you trained on only the 5,000 images.  

If you don’t have huge computational resources, you could  give the internet images a much 
lower weight as a compromise.  

For example, suppose your optimization objective is squared error (This is not a good choice 
for a classification task, but it will simplify our explanation.) Thus, our learning algorithm 
tries to optimize: 

The first sum above is over the 5,000 mobile images, and the second sum is over the 
𝛽​:  
200,000 internet images. You can instead optimize with an additional parameter 

𝛽​=1/40, the algorithm would give equal weight to the 5,000 mobile images and the 

 If you set 
200,000 internet images. You can also set the parameter 
tuning to the dev set.  

𝛽​ to other values, perhaps by 

By weighting the additional Internet images less, you don’t have to build as massive a neural 
network to make sure the algorithm does well on both types of tasks. This type of 
re-weighting is needed only when you suspect the additional data (Internet Images) has a 
very different distribution than the dev/test set, or if the additional data is much larger than 
the data that came from the same distribution as the dev/test set (mobile images).  

Page 76



Andrew Ng 

 
 
 
 
​
 
​
​
40 Generalizing from the training set to the 
dev set 

Suppose you are applying ML in a setting where the training and the dev/test distributions 
are different. Say, the training set contains Internet images + Mobile images, and the 
dev/test sets contain only Mobile images. However, the algorithm is not working well: It has 
a much higher dev/test set error than you would like. Here are some possibilities of what 
might be wrong:  

1. It does not do well on the training set. This is the problem of high (avoidable) bias on the 

training set distribution.  

2. It does well on the training set, but does not generalize well to previously unseen data 

. This is high variance.  
drawn from the same distribution as the training set
​

3. It generalizes well to new data drawn from the same distribution as the training set, but 

not to data drawn from the dev/test set distribution. We call this problem 
mismatch
data.  

, since it is because the training set data is a poor match for the dev/test set 

data 

For example, suppose that humans achieve near perfect performance on the cat recognition 
task. Your algorithm achieves this:  

• 1% error on the training set 

• 1.5% error on data drawn from the same distribution as the training set that the algorithm 

has not seen 

• 10% error on the dev set  

In this case, you clearly have a data mismatch problem. To address this, you might try to 
make the training data more similar to the dev/test data. We discuss some techniques for 
this later.  

In order to diagnose to what extent an algorithm suffers from each of the problems 1-3 
above, it will be useful to have another dataset. Specifically, rather than giving the algorithm 
all the available training data, you can split it into two subsets: The actual training set which 
the algorithm will train on, and a separate set, which we will call the “Training dev” set, that 
we will not train on.  

You now have four subsets of data: 

Page 77



Andrew Ng 

 
 
​
​
• Training set. This is the data that the algorithm will learn from (e.g., Internet images + 
Mobile images). This does not have to be drawn from the same distribution as what we 
really care about (the dev/test set distribution). 

• Training dev set: This data is drawn from the same distribution as the training set (e.g., 
Internet images + Mobile images). This is usually smaller than the training set; it only 
needs to be large enough to evaluate and track the progress of our learning algorithm.  

• Dev set: This is drawn from the same distribution as the test set, and it reflects the 

distribution of data that we ultimately care about doing well on. (E.g., mobile images.)  

• Test set: This is drawn from the same distribution as the dev set. (E.g., mobile images.) 

Armed with these four separate datasets, you can now evaluate: 

• Training error, by evaluating on the training set.  

• The algorithm’s ability to generalize to new data drawn from the training set distribution, 

by evaluating on the training dev set. 

• The algorithm’s performance on the task you care about, by evaluating on the dev and/or 

test sets.  

Most of the guidelines in Chapters 5-7 for picking the size of the dev set also apply to the 
training dev set.   

Page 78



Andrew Ng 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 Identifying Bias, Variance, and Data 
Mismatch Errors  

Suppose humans achieve almost perfect performance (≈0% error) on the cat detection task, 
and thus the optimal error rate is about 0%. Suppose you have: 

• 1% error on the training set. 

• 5% error on training dev set.  

• 5% error on the dev set.  

What does this tell you? Here, you know that you have high variance. The variance reduction 
techniques described earlier should allow you to make progress.  

Now, suppose your algorithm achieves:  

• 10% error on the training set. 

• 11% error on training dev set.  

• 12% error on the dev set.  

This tells you that you have high avoidable bias on the training set. I.e., the algorithm is 
doing poorly on the training set. Bias reduction techniques should help. 

In the two examples above, the algorithm suffered from only high avoidable bias or high 
variance. It is possible for an algorithm to suffer from any subset of high avoidable bias, high 
variance, and data mismatch. For example:  

• 10% error on the training set.  

• 11% error on training dev set.  

• 20% error on the dev set.  

This algorithm suffers from high avoidable bias and from data mismatch. It does not, 
however, suffer from high variance on the training set distribution.  

It might be easier to understand how the different types of errors relate to each other by 
drawing them as entries in a table:   

Page 79



Andrew Ng 

 
 
e cat image detector, you can see that there are two 

Continuing with the example of th
different distributions of data on the x-axis. On the y-axis, we ha
human level error, error on examples the algorithm has trained on, and error on examples 
the algorithm has not trained on. We can fill in the boxes with the different types of errors we 
identified in the previous chapter.  

ve three types of error: 

If you wish, you can also fill in the remaining two boxes in this table: You can fill in the 
upper-right box (Human level performance on Mobile Images) by asking some humans to 
label your mobile cat images data and measure their error. You can fill in the next box by 
taking the mobile cat images (Distribution B) and putting a small fraction of into the training 
set so that the neural network learns on it too. Then you measure the learned model’s error 
on that subset of data. Filling in these two additional entries may sometimes give additional 
insight about what the algorithm is doing on the two different distributions (Distribution A 
and B) of data.  

By understanding which types of error the algorithm suffers from the most, you will be better 
positioned to decide whether to focus on reducing bias, reducing variance, or reducing data 
mismatch.  

Page 