nversation where people are especially
excited or engaged, conversational hot spots that can help in meeting summariza-
tion. Detecting the personality of a user—such as whether the user is an extrovert
or the extent to which they are open to experience— can help improve conversa-
tional agents, which seem to work better if they match users’ personality expecta-
tions (Mairesse and Walker, 2008). And affect is important for generation as well
as recognition; synthesizing affect is important for conversational agents in various
domains, including literacy tutors such as children’s storybooks, or computer games.
In Chapter 4 we introduced the use of naive Bayes classiﬁcation to classify a
document’s sentiment. Various classiﬁers have been successfully applied to many of
these tasks, using all the words in the training set as input to a classiﬁer which then
determines the affect status of the text.

In this chapter we focus on an alternative model, in which instead of using every
word as a feature, we focus only on certain words, ones that carry particularly strong
cues to affect or sentiment. We call these lists of words affective lexicons or senti-
ment lexicons. These lexicons presuppose a fact about semantics: that words have
affective meanings or connotations. The word connotation has different meanings
in different ﬁelds, but here we use it to mean the aspects of a word’s meaning that
are related to a writer or reader’s emotions, sentiment, opinions, or evaluations. In
addition to their ability to help determine the affective status of a text, connotation
lexicons can be useful features for other kinds of affective tasks, and for computa-
tional social science analysis.

In the next sections we introduce basic theories of emotion, show how sentiment
lexicons are a special case of emotion lexicons, and mention some useful lexicons.
We then survey three ways for building lexicons: human labeling, semi-supervised,
and supervised. Finally, we talk about how to detect affect toward a particular entity,
and introduce connotation frames.

connotations

21.1 Deﬁning Emotion

emotion

basic emotions

One of the most important affective classes is emotion, which Scherer (2000) deﬁnes
as a “relatively brief episode of response to the evaluation of an external or internal
event as being of major signiﬁcance”.

Detecting emotion has the potential to improve a number of language processing
tasks. Emotion recognition could help dialogue systems like tutoring systems detect
that a student was unhappy, bored, hesitant, conﬁdent, and so on. Automatically
detecting emotions in reviews or customer responses (anger, dissatisfaction, trust)
could help businesses recognize speciﬁc problem areas or ones that are going well.
Emotion can play a role in medical NLP tasks like helping diagnose depression or
suicidal intent. Detecting emotions expressed toward characters in novels might
play a role in understanding how different social groups were viewed by society at
different times.

Computational models of emotion in NLP have mainly been based on two fami-
lies of theories of emotion (out of the many studied in the ﬁeld of affective science).
In one of these families, emotions are viewed as ﬁxed atomic units, limited in num-
ber, and from which others are generated, often called basic emotions (Tomkins

21.1

• DEFINING EMOTION

463

1962, Plutchik 1962), a model dating back to Darwin. Perhaps the most well-known
of this family of theories are the 6 emotions proposed by Ekman (e.g., Ekman 1999)
to be universally present in all cultures: surprise, happiness, anger, fear, disgust,
sadness. Another atomic theory is the Plutchik (1980) wheel of emotion, consisting
of 8 basic emotions in four opposing pairs: joy–sadness, anger–fear, trust–disgust,
and anticipation–surprise, together with the emotions derived from them, shown in
Fig. 21.2.

Figure 21.2 Plutchik wheel of emotion.

The second class of emotion theories widely used in NLP views emotion as a
space in 2 or 3 dimensions (Russell, 1980). Most models include the two dimensions
valence and arousal, and many add a third, dominance. These can be deﬁned as:

valence: the pleasantness of the stimulus
arousal: the level of alertness, activeness, or energy provoked by the stimulus
dominance: the degree of control or dominance exerted by the stimulus or the

emotion

Sentiment can be viewed as a special case of this second view of emotions as points
in space. In particular, the valence dimension, measuring how pleasant or unpleasant
a word is, is often used directly as a measure of sentiment.

In these lexicon-based models of affect, the affective meaning of a word is gen-
erally ﬁxed, irrespective of the linguistic context in which a word is used, or the
dialect or culture of the speaker. By contrast, other models in affective science repre-
sent emotions as much richer processes involving cognition (Barrett et al., 2007). In
appraisal theory, for example, emotions are complex processes, in which a person
considers how an event is congruent with their goals, taking into account variables
like the agency, certainty, urgency, novelty and control associated with the event
(Moors et al., 2013). Computational models in NLP taking into account these richer
theories of emotion will likely play an important role in future work.

464 CHAPTER 21

• LEXICONS FOR SENTIMENT, AFFECT, AND CONNOTATION

21.2 Available Sentiment and Affect Lexicons

General
Inquirer

A wide variety of affect lexicons have been created and released. The most basic
lexicons label words along one dimension of semantic variability, generally called
“sentiment” or “valence”.

In the simplest lexicons this dimension is represented in a binary fashion, with
a wordlist for positive words and a wordlist for negative words. The oldest is the
General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966), which drew on content analysis and on early
work in the cognitive psychology of word meaning (Osgood et al., 1957). The Gen-
eral Inquirer has a lexicon of 1915 positive words and a lexicon of 2291 negative
words (as well as other lexicons discussed below). The MPQA Subjectivity lexicon
(Wilson et al., 2005) has 2718 positive and 4912 negative words drawn from prior
lexicons plus a bootstrapped list of subjective words and phrases (Riloff and Wiebe,
2003). Each entry in the lexicon is hand-labeled for sentiment and also labeled for
reliability (strongly subjective or weakly subjective). The polarity lexicon of Hu
and Liu (2004b) gives 2006 positive and 4783 negative words, drawn from product
reviews, labeled using a bootstrapping method from WordNet.

Positive

admire, amazing, assure, celebration, charm, eager, enthusiastic, excellent, fancy, fan-
tastic, frolic, graceful, happy, joy, luck, majesty, mercy, nice, patience, perfect, proud,
rejoice, relief, respect, satisfactorily, sensational, super, terriﬁc, thank, vivid, wise, won-
derful, zest

Negative abominable, anger, anxious, bad, catastrophe, cheap, complaint, condescending, deceit,
defective, disappointment, embarrass, fake, fear, ﬁlthy, fool, guilt, hate, idiot, inﬂict, lazy,
miserable, mourn, nervous, objection, pest, plot, reject, scream, silly, terrible, unfriendly,
vile, wicked

Figure 21.3 Some words with consistent sentiment across the General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966), the
MPQA Subjectivity lexicon (Wilson et al., 2005), and the polarity lexicon of Hu and Liu (2004b).

Slightly more general than these sentiment lexicons are lexicons that assign each
word a value on all three affective dimensions. The NRC Valence, Arousal, and
Dominance (VAD) lexicon (Mohammad, 2018a) assigns valence, arousal, and dom-
inance scores to 20,000 words. Some examples are shown in Fig. 21.4.

Valence

Arousal

Dominance

vacation
delightful
whistle
consolation
torture

.840
.918
.653
.408
.115

enraged
party
organized
effortless
napping

.962
.840
.337
.120
.046

powerful
authority
saxophone
discouraged
weak

.991
.935
.482
.0090
.045

Figure 21.4 Values of sample words on the emotional dimensions of Mohammad (2018a).

EmoLex

The NRC Word-Emotion Association Lexicon, also called EmoLex (Moham-
mad and Turney, 2013), uses the Plutchik (1980) 8 basic emotions deﬁned above.
The lexicon includes around 14,000 words including words from prior lexicons as
well as frequent nouns, verbs, adverbs and adjectives. Values from the lexicon for
some sample words:

21.3

• CREATING AFFECT LEXICONS BY HUMAN LABELING

465

n
o
i
t
a
p
i
c
i
t
n
a

r
e
g
n
a

t
s
u
g
s
i
d

r
a
e
f

y
o
j

s
s
e
n
d
a
s

e
s
i
r
p
r
u
s

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n

t
s
u
r
t

Word
reward
0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0
0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1
worry
tenderness 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0
sweetheart 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
suddenly
0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0
thirst
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
garbage

For a smaller set of 5,814 words, the NRC Emotion/Affect Intensity Lexicon
(Mohammad, 2018b) contains real-valued scores of association for anger, fear, joy,
and sadness; Fig. 21.5 shows examples.

Anger

Fear

Joy

Sadness

0.964
outraged
0.742
violence
0.578
coup
oust
0.484
suspicious 0.484
0.059
nurture

0.864
superb
0.923
horror
cheered
0.773
anguish
0.703
rainbow 0.531
pestilence 0.625
0.387
0.531
stressed
gesture
0.391
0.531 warms
failing
.031
0.094
conﬁdent

hardship

0.844
sad
0.750
guilt
unkind
0.547
difﬁculties 0.421
0.422
beggar
0.017
sing

Figure 21.5 Sample emotional intensities for words for anger, fear, joy, and sadness from
Mohammad (2018b).

LIWC

concrete

abstract

LIWC, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count, is a widely used set of 73 lex-
icons containing over 2300 words (Pennebaker et al., 2007), designed to capture
aspects of lexical meaning relevant for social psychological tasks. In addition to
sentiment-related lexicons like ones for negative emotion (bad, weird, hate, prob-
lem, tough) and positive emotion (love, nice, sweet), LIWC includes lexicons for
categories like anger, sadness, cognitive mechanisms, perception, tentative, and in-
hibition, shown in Fig. 21.6.

There are various other hand-built affective lexicons. The General Inquirer in-
cludes additional lexicons for dimensions like strong vs. weak, active vs. passive,
overstated vs. understated, as well as lexicons for categories like pleasure, pain,
virtue, vice, motivation, and cognitive orientation.

Another useful feature for various tasks is the distinction between concrete
words like banana or bathrobe and abstract words like belief and although. The
lexicon in Brysbaert et al. (2014) used crowdsourcing to assign a rating from 1 to 5
of the concreteness of 40,000 words, thus assigning banana, bathrobe, and bagel 5,
belief 1.19, although 1.07, and in between words like brisk a 2.5.

21.3 Creating Affect Lexicons by Human Labeling

crowdsourcing

The earliest method used to build affect lexicons, and still in common use, is to have
humans label each word. This is now most commonly done via crowdsourcing:
breaking the task into small pieces and distributing them to a large number of anno-

466 CHAPTER 21

• LEXICONS FOR SENTIMENT, AFFECT, AND CONNOTATION

Positive
Emotion
appreciat*
comfort*
great
happy
interest
joy*
perfect*
please*
safe*
terriﬁc
value
wow*

Negative
Emotion
anger*
bore*
cry
despair*
fail*
fear
griev*
hate*
panic*
suffers
terrify
violent*

Insight
aware*
believe
decid*
feel
ﬁgur*
know
knew
means
notice*
recogni*
sense
think

Inhibition
avoid*
careful*
hesitat*
limit*
oppos*
prevent*
reluctan*
safe*
stop
stubborn*
wait
wary

Family
brother*
cousin*
daughter*
family
father*
grandf*
grandm*
husband
mom
mother
niece*
wife

Negate
aren’t
cannot
didn’t
neither
never
no
nobod*
none
nor
nothing
nowhere
without

Figure 21.6 Samples from 5 of the 73 lexical categories in LIWC (Pennebaker et al., 2007).
The * means the previous letters are a word preﬁx and all words with that preﬁx are included
in the category.

tators. Let’s take a look at some of the methodological choices for two crowdsourced
emotion lexicons.

The NRC Emotion Lexicon (EmoLex) (Mohammad and Turney, 2013), labeled
emotions in two steps. To ensure that the annotators were judging the correct sense
of the word, they ﬁrst answered a multiple-choice synonym question that primed
the correct sense of the word (without requiring the annotator to read a potentially
confusing sense deﬁnition). These were created automatically using the headwords
associated with the thesaurus category of the sense in question in the Macquarie
dictionary and the headwords of 3 random distractor categories. An example:

Which word is closest in meaning (most related) to startle?

• automobile
• shake
• honesty
• entertain

For each word (e.g. startle), the annotator was then asked to rate how associated
that word is with each of the 8 emotions (joy, fear, anger, etc.). The associations
were rated on a scale of not, weakly, moderately, and strongly associated. Outlier
ratings were removed, and then each term was assigned the class chosen by the ma-
jority of the annotators, with ties broken by choosing the stronger intensity, and then
the 4 levels were mapped into a binary label for each word (no and weak mapped to
0, moderate and strong mapped to 1).

The NRC VAD Lexicon (Mohammad, 2018a) was built by selecting words and
emoticons from prior lexicons and annotating them with crowd-sourcing using best-
worst scaling (Louviere et al. 2015, Kiritchenko and Mohammad 2017). In best-
worst scaling, annotators are given N items (usually 4) and are asked which item is
the best (highest) and which is the worst (lowest) in terms of some property. The
set of words used to describe the ends of the scales are taken from prior literature.
For valence, for example, the raters were asked:

Q1. Which of the four words below is associated with the MOST happi-
ness / pleasure / positiveness / satisfaction / contentedness / hopefulness
OR LEAST unhappiness / annoyance / negativeness / dissatisfaction /

best-worst
scaling

21.4

• SEMI-SUPERVISED INDUCTION OF AFFECT LEXICONS

467

melancholy / despair? (Four words listed as options.)
Q2. Which of the four words below is associated with the LEAST hap-
piness / pleasure / positiveness / satisfaction / contentedness / hopeful-
ness OR MOST unhappiness / annoyance / negativeness / dissatisfaction
/ melancholy / despair? (Four words listed as options.)

The score for each word in the lexicon is the proportion of times the item was chosen
as the best (highest V/A/D) minus the proportion of times the item was chosen as the
worst (lowest V/A/D). The agreement between annotations are evaluated by split-
half reliability: split the corpus in half and compute the correlations between the
annotations in the two halves.

split-half
reliability

21.4 Semi-supervised Induction of Affect Lexicons

Another common way to learn sentiment lexicons is to start from a set of seed words
that deﬁne two poles of a semantic axis (words like good or bad), and then ﬁnd ways
to label each word w by its similarity to the two seed sets. Here we summarize two
families of seed-based semi-supervised lexicon induction algorithms, axis-based and
graph-based.

21.4.1 Semantic Axis Methods

One of the most well-known lexicon induction methods, the Turney and Littman
(2003) algorithm, is given seed words like good or bad, and then for each word w to
be labeled, measures both how similar it is to good and how different it is from bad.
Here we describe a slight extension of the algorithm due to An et al. (2018), which
is based on comp