om the utterance time and the event time. The
following examples illustrate the basics of this approach:

(19.18) When Mary’s ﬂight departed, I ate lunch.
(19.19) When Mary’s ﬂight departed, I had eaten lunch.

In both of these examples, the eating event has happened in the past, that is, prior
to the utterance. However, the verb tense in the ﬁrst example indicates that the eating
event began when the ﬂight departed, while the second example indicates that the
eating was accomplished prior to the ﬂight’s departure. Therefore, in Reichenbach’s
terms the departure event speciﬁes the reference point. These facts can be accom-
modated by additional constraints relating the eating and departure events. In the
ﬁrst example, the reference point precedes the eating event, and in the second exam-
ple, the eating precedes the reference point. Figure 19.12 illustrates Reichenbach’s
approach with the primary English tenses. Exercise 19.4 asks you to represent these
examples in FOL.

Figure 19.12 Reichenbach’s approach applied to various English tenses. In these diagrams,
time ﬂows from left to right, E denotes the time of the event, R denotes the reference time,
and U denotes the time of the utterance.

Languages have many other ways to convey temporal information besides tense.
Most useful for our purposes will be temporal expressions like in the morning or
6:45 or afterwards.

(19.20) I’d like to go at 6:45 in the morning.
(19.21) Somewhere around noon, please.
(19.22) I want to take the train back afterwards.

Incidentally, temporal expressions display a fascinating metaphorical conceptual
organization. Temporal expressions in English are frequently expressed in spatial
terms, as is illustrated by the various uses of at, in, somewhere, and near in these
examples (Lakoff and Johnson 1980, Jackendoff 1983). Metaphorical organizations
such as these, in which one domain is systematically expressed in terms of another,
are very common in languages of the world.

Past PerfectSimple PastPresent PerfectSimple FutureFuture PerfectPresentEEEERRUR,EUR,UU,R,EU,RU430 CHAPTER 19

•

INFORMATION EXTRACTION: RELATIONS, EVENTS, AND TIME

19.5 Representing Aspect

aspect

aktionsart

events

states

stative

A related notion to time is aspect, which is what we call the way events can be
categorized by their internal temporal structure or temporal contour. By this we
mean questions like whether events are ongoing or have ended, or whether they are
conceptualized as happening at a point in time or over some interval. Such notions
of temporal contour have been used to divide event expressions into classes since
Aristotle, although the set of four classes we’ll introduce here is due to Vendler
(1967) (you may also see the German term aktionsart used to refer to these classes).
The most basic aspectual distinction is between events (which involve change)
and states (which do not involve change). Stative expressions represent the notion
of an event participant being in a state, or having a particular property, at a given
point in time. Stative expressions capture aspects of the world at a single point in
time, and conceptualize the participant as unchanging and continuous. Consider the
following ATIS examples.

(19.23) I like express trains.
(19.24) I need the cheapest fare.
(19.25) I want to go ﬁrst class.

activity

In examples like these, the event participant denoted by the subject can be seen as
experiencing something at a speciﬁc point in time, and don’t involve any kind of
internal change over time (the liking or needing is conceptualized as continuous and
unchanging).

Non-states (which we’ll refer to as events) are divided into subclasses; we’ll
introduce three here. Activity expressions describe events undertaken by a partic-
ipant that occur over a span of time (rather than being conceptualized as a single
point in time like stative expressions), and have no particular end point. Of course
in practice all things end, but the meaning of the expression doesn’t represent this
fact. Consider the following examples:

(19.26) She drove a Mazda.
(19.27) I live in Brooklyn.

These examples both specify that the subject is engaged in, or has engaged in, the
activity speciﬁed by the verb for some period of time, but doesn’t specify when the
driving or living might have stopped.

Two more classes of expressions, achievement expressions and accomplish-
ment expressions, describe events that take place over time, but also conceptualize
the event as having a particular kind of endpoint or goal. The Greek word telos
means ‘end’ or ’goal’ and so the events described by these kinds of expressions are
often called telic events.

Accomplishment expressions describe events that have a natural end point and

result in a particular state. Consider the following examples:

(19.28) He booked me a reservation.
(19.29) The 7:00 train got me to New York City.

telic
accomplishment
expressions

In these examples, an event is seen as occurring over some period of time that ends
when the intended state is accomplished (i.e., the state of me having a reservation,
or me being in New York City).

The ﬁnal aspectual class, achievement expressions, is only subtly different than

accomplishments. Consider the following:

achievement
expressions

19.6

• TEMPORALLY ANNOTATED DATASETS: TIMEBANK

431

(19.30) She found her gate.
(19.31) I reached New York.

Like accomplishment expressions, achievement expressions result in a state. But
unlike accomplishments, achievement events are ‘punctual’: they are thought of as
happening in an instant and the verb doesn’t conceptualize the process or activ-
ity leading up the state. Thus the events in these examples may in fact have been
preceded by extended searching or traveling events, but the verb doesn’t conceptu-
alize these preceding processes, but rather conceptualizes the events corresponding
to ﬁnding and reaching as points, not intervals.

In summary, a standard way of categorizing event expressions by their temporal

contours is via these four general classes:

Stative: I know my departure gate.
Activity: John is ﬂying.
Accomplishment: Sally booked her ﬂight.
Achievement: She found her gate.

Before moving on, note that event expressions can easily be shifted from one

class to another. Consider the following examples:

(19.32) I ﬂew.
(19.33) I ﬂew to New York.

The ﬁrst example is a simple activity; it has no natural end point. The second ex-
ample is clearly an accomplishment event since it has an end point, and results in a
particular state. Clearly, the classiﬁcation of an event is not solely governed by the
verb, but by the semantics of the entire expression in context.

19.6 Temporally Annotated Datasets: TimeBank

TimeBank

The TimeBank corpus consists of American English text annotated with temporal
information (Pustejovsky et al., 2003). The annotations use TimeML (Saur´ı et al.,
2006), a markup language for time based on Allen’s interval algebra discussed above
(Allen, 1984). There are three types of TimeML objects: an EVENT represent events
and states, a TIME represents time expressions like dates, and a LINK represents
various relationships between events and times (event-event, event-time, and time-
time). The links include temporal links (TLINK) for the 13 Allen relations, aspec-
tual links (ALINK) for aspectual relationships between events and subevents, and
SLINKS which mark factuality.

Consider the following sample sentence and its corresponding markup shown in

Fig. 19.13, selected from one of the TimeBank documents.

(19.34) Delta Air Lines earnings soared 33% to a record in the ﬁscal ﬁrst quarter,

bucking the industry trend toward declining proﬁts.

This text has three events and two temporal expressions (including the creation
time of the article, which serves as the document time), and four temporal links that
capture the using the Allen relations:

• Soaringe1 is included in the ﬁscal ﬁrst quartert58
• Soaringe1 is before 1989-10-26t57
• Soaringe1 is simultaneous with the buckinge3

432 CHAPTER 19

•

INFORMATION EXTRACTION: RELATIONS, EVENTS, AND TIME

<TIMEX3 tid="t57" type="DATE" value="1989-10-26"
10/26/89 </TIMEX3>

functionInDocument="CREATION_TIME">

<TIMEX3 tid="t58" type="DATE" value="1989-Q1" anchorTimeID="t57"> the

Delta Air Lines earnings <EVENT eid="e1" class="OCCURRENCE"> soared </EVENT> 33% to a
record in
fiscal first quarter </TIMEX3>, <EVENT eid="e3"
the industry trend toward <EVENT eid="e4" class="OCCURRENCE">declining</EVENT>
profits.

class="OCCURRENCE">bucking</EVENT>

Figure 19.13 Example from the TimeBank corpus.

• Declininge4 includes soaringe1

We can also visualize the links as a graph. The TimeBank snippet in Eq. 19.35

would be represented with a graph like Fig. 19.14.

(19.35) [DCT:11/02/891]1: Paciﬁc First Financial Corp. said2 shareholders

approved3 its acquisition4 by Royal Trustco Ltd. of Toronto for $27 a share,
or $212 million. The thrift holding company said5 it expects6 to obtain7
regulatory approval8 and complete9 the transaction10 by year-end11.

Figure 19.14 A graph of the text in Eq. 19.35, adapted from (Ocal et al., 2022). TLINKS
are shown in blue, ALINKS in red, and SLINKS in green.

19.7 Automatic Temporal Analysis

Here we introduce the three common steps used in analyzing time in text:

1. Extracting temporal expressions
2. Normalizing these expressions, by converting them to a standard format.
3. Linking events to times and extracting time graphs and timelines

19.7.1 Extracting Temporal Expressions

absolute

relative

duration

lexical triggers

Temporal expressions are phrases that refer to absolute points in time, relative times,
durations, and sets of these. Absolute temporal expressions are those that can be
mapped directly to calendar dates, times of day, or both. Relative temporal expres-
sions map to particular times through some other reference point (as in a week from
last Tuesday). Finally, durations denote spans of time at varying levels of granular-
ity (seconds, minutes, days, weeks, centuries, etc.). Figure 19.15 lists some sample
temporal expressions in each of these categories.

Temporal expressions are grammatical constructions that often have temporal
lexical triggers as their heads, making them easy to ﬁnd. Lexical triggers might
be nouns, proper nouns, adjectives, and adverbs; full temporal expressions consist

1234567811910BEFOREBEFOREAFTERSIMULTANEOUSENDSCULMINATESBEFOREEVIDENTIALMODALFACTIVEMODALEVIDENTIALMODAL19.7

• AUTOMATIC TEMPORAL ANALYSIS

433

Absolute
April 24, 1916
The summer of ’77
10:15 AM
The 3rd quarter of 2006
Figure 19.15 Examples of absolute, relational and durational temporal expressions.

Relative
yesterday
next semester
two weeks from yesterday
last quarter

Durations
four hours
three weeks
six days
the last three quarters

of their phrasal projections: noun phrases, adjective phrases, and adverbial phrases
(Figure 19.16).

Examples
morning, noon, night, winter, dusk, dawn

Category
Noun
Proper Noun January, Monday, Ides, Easter, Rosh Hashana, Ramadan, Tet
Adjective
Adverb
Figure 19.16 Examples of temporal lexical triggers.

recent, past, annual, former
hourly, daily, monthly, yearly

The task is to detect temporal expressions in running text, like this examples,

shown with TIMEX3 tags (Pustejovsky et al. 2005, Ferro et al. 2005).

A fare increase initiated <TIMEX3>last week</TIMEX3> by UAL
Corp’s United Airlines was matched by competitors over <TIMEX3>the
weekend</TIMEX3>, marking the second successful fare increase in
<TIMEX3>two weeks</TIMEX3>.

Rule-based approaches use cascades of regular expressions to recognize larger
and larger chunks from previous stages, based on patterns containing parts of speech,
trigger words (e.g., February) or classes (e.g., MONTH) (Chang and Manning, 2012;
Str¨otgen and Gertz, 2013; Chambers, 2013). Here’s a rule from SUTime (Chang and
Manning, 2012) for detecting expressions like 3 years old:

/(\d+)[-\s]($TEUnits)(s)?([-\s]old)?/

Sequence-labeling approaches use the standard IOB scheme, marking words

that are either (I)nside, (O)utside or at the (B)eginning of a temporal expression:

A
O

fare
O

increase
O

initiated
O

last
B

week
I

by
O

UAL
O

Corp’s...
O

A statistical sequence labeler is trained, using either embeddings or a ﬁne-tuned
encoder, or classic features extracted from the token and context including words,
lexical triggers, and POS.

Temporal expression recognizers are evaluated with the usual recall, precision,
and F-measures. A major difﬁculty for all of these very lexicalized approaches is
avoiding expressions that trigger false positives:

(19.36) 1984 tells the story of Winston Smith...
(19.37) ...U2’s classic Sunday Bloody Sunday

19.7.2 Temporal Normalization

temporal
normalization

Temporal normalization is the task of mapping a temporal expression to a point
in time or to a duration. Points in time correspond to calendar dates, to times of
day, or both. Durations primarily consist of lengths of time. Normalized times
are represented via the ISO 8601 standard for encoding temporal values (ISO8601,
2004). Fig. 19.17 reproduces our earlier example with these value attributes.

434 CHAPTER 19

•

INFORMATION EXTRACTION: RELATIONS, EVENTS, AND TIME

<TIMEX3 i d =” t 1 ’ ’

t y p e =”DATE” v a l u e =” 2007 −07 −02 ” f u n c t i o n I n D o c u m e n t =”CREATION TIME”>

J u l y 2 , 2007 </TIMEX3> A f a r e

i n c r e a s e

i n i t i a t e d <TIMEX3 i d =” t 2 ” t y p e =”DATE”

v a l u e =” 2007 −W26” a n c h o r T i m e I D =” t 1 ”> l a s t week </TIMEX3> by U n i t e d A i r l i n e s was
m a t c h e d by c o m p e t i t o r s o v e r <TIMEX3 i d =” t 3 ” t y p e =”DURATION” v a l u e =”P1WE”
a n c h o r T i m e I D =” t 1 ”> t h e weekend </TIMEX3>, m a r k i n g t h e s e c o n d s u c c e s s f u l
i n c r e a s e
weeks </TIMEX3>.

i n <TIMEX3 i d =” t 4 ” t y p e =”DURATION” v a l u e =”P2W” a n c h o r T i m e I D =” t 1 ”> two

f a r e

Figure 19.17 TimeML markup including normalized values for temporal expressions.

The dateline, or document date, for this text was July 2, 2007. The ISO repre-
sentation for this kind of expression is YYYY-MM-DD, or in this case, 2007-07-02.
The encodings for the temporal expressions in our sample text all follow from this
date, and are shown here as values for the VALUE attribute.

The ﬁrst temporal expression in the text proper refers to a particular week of the
year. In the ISO standard, weeks are numbered from 01 to 53, with the ﬁrst week
of the year being the one that has the ﬁrst Thursday of the year. These weeks are
represented with the template YYYY-Wnn. The ISO week for our document date is
week 27; thus the value for last week is represented as “2007-W26”.

The next temporal expression is the weekend. ISO weeks begin on Monday;
thus, weekends occur at the end of a week and are fully contained within a single
week. Weekends are treated as durations, so the value of the VALUE attribute has
to be a length. Durations are represented according to the pattern Pnx, where n is
an integer denoting the length and x represents the unit, as in P3Y for three years
or P2D for two days. In this example, one weekend is captured as P1WE. In this
case, there is also sufﬁcient information to anchor this particular weekend as part of
a particular week. Such information is encoded in the ANCHORTIMEID attribute.
Finally, the phrase two weeks also denotes a duration captured as P2W. Figure 19.18
give some