 on named entity recognition, relation extraction, and temporal ex-
pressions1, the KBP (Knowledge Base Population) evaluations (Ji et al. 2010, Sur-
deanu 2013) of relation extraction tasks like slot ﬁlling (extracting attributes (‘slots’)
like age, birthplace, and spouse for a given entity) and a series of SemEval work-
shops (Hendrickx et al., 2009).

Semisupervised relation extraction was ﬁrst proposed by Hearst (1992b), and
extended by systems like AutoSlog-TS (Riloff, 1996), DIPRE (Brin, 1998), SNOW-
BALL (Agichtein and Gravano, 2000), and Jones et al. (1999). The distant super-
vision algorithm we describe was drawn from Mintz et al. (2009), who ﬁrst used
the term ‘distant supervision’ (which was suggested to them by Chris Manning)
but similar ideas had occurred in earlier systems like Craven and Kumlien (1999)
and Morgan et al. (2004) under the name weakly labeled data, as well as in Snow
et al. (2005) and Wu and Weld (2007). Among the many extensions are Wu and
Weld (2010), Riedel et al. (2010), and Ritter et al. (2013). Open IE systems include
KNOWITALL Etzioni et al. (2005), TextRunner (Banko et al., 2007), and REVERB
(Fader et al., 2011). See Riedel et al. (2013) for a universal schema that combines
the advantages of distant supervision and Open IE.

KBP

slot ﬁlling

Exercises

19.1 Acronym expansion, the process of associating a phrase with an acronym, can

1 www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/

440 CHAPTER 19

•

INFORMATION EXTRACTION: RELATIONS, EVENTS, AND TIME

be accomplished by a simple form of relational analysis. Develop a system
based on the relation analysis approaches described in this chapter to populate
a database of acronym expansions.
If you focus on English Three Letter
Acronyms (TLAs) you can evaluate your system’s performance by comparing
it to Wikipedia’s TLA page.

19.2 Acquire the CMU seminar corpus and develop a template-ﬁlling system by
using any of the techniques mentioned in Section 19.8. Analyze how well
your system performs as compared with state-of-the-art results on this corpus.

19.3 A useful functionality in newer email and calendar applications is the ability
to associate temporal expressions connected with events in email (doctor’s
appointments, meeting planning, party invitations, etc.) with speciﬁc calendar
entries. Collect a corpus of email containing temporal expressions related to
event planning. How do these expressions compare to the kinds of expressions
commonly found in news text that we’ve been discussing in this chapter?

19.4 For the following sentences, give FOL translations that capture the temporal

relationships between the events.

1. When Mary’s ﬂight departed, I ate lunch.
2. When Mary’s ﬂight departed, I had eaten lunch.

CHAPTER

20 Semantic Role Labeling

“Who, What, Where, When, With what, Why, How”

The seven circumstances, associated with Hermagoras and Aristotle (Sloan, 2010)

Sometime between the 7th and 4th centuries BCE, the Indian grammarian P¯an. ini1
wrote a famous treatise on Sanskrit grammar, the As.t.¯adhy¯ay¯ı (‘8 books’), a treatise
that has been called “one of the greatest monuments of hu-
man intelligence” (Bloomﬁeld, 1933, 11). The work de-
scribes the linguistics of the Sanskrit language in the form
of 3959 sutras, each very efﬁciently (since it had to be
memorized!) expressing part of a formal rule system that
brilliantly preﬁgured modern mechanisms of formal lan-
guage theory (Penn and Kiparsky, 2012). One set of rules
describes the k¯arakas, semantic relationships between a
verb and noun arguments, roles like agent, instrument, or
destination. P¯an. ini’s work was the earliest we know of
that modeled the linguistic realization of events and their
participants. This task of understanding how participants relate to events—being
able to answer the question “Who did what to whom” (and perhaps also “when and
where”)—is a central question of natural language processing.

Let’s move forward 2.5 millennia to the present and consider the very mundane
goal of understanding text about a purchase of stock by XYZ Corporation. This
purchasing event and its participants can be described by a wide variety of surface
forms. The event can be described by a verb (sold, bought) or a noun (purchase),
and XYZ Corp can be the syntactic subject (of bought), the indirect object (of sold),
or in a genitive or noun compound relation (with the noun purchase) despite having
notionally the same role in all of them:

• XYZ corporation bought the stock.
• They sold the stock to XYZ corporation.
• The stock was bought by XYZ corporation.
• The purchase of the stock by XYZ corporation...
• The stock purchase by XYZ corporation...

In this chapter we introduce a level of representation that captures the common-
ality between these sentences:
there was a purchase event, the participants were
XYZ Corp and some stock, and XYZ Corp was the buyer. These shallow semantic
representations , semantic roles, express the role that arguments of a predicate take
in the event, codiﬁed in databases like PropBank and FrameNet. We’ll introduce
semantic role labeling, the task of assigning roles to spans in sentences, and selec-
tional restrictions, the preferences that predicates express about their arguments,
such as the fact that the theme of eat is generally something edible.

1 Figure shows a birch bark manuscript from Kashmir of the Rupavatra, a grammatical textbook based
on the Sanskrit grammar of Panini. Image from the Wellcome Collection.

442 CHAPTER 20

• SEMANTIC ROLE LABELING

20.1 Semantic Roles

Consider the meanings of the arguments Sasha, Pat, the window, and the door in
these two sentences.
(20.1) Sasha broke the window.
(20.2) Pat opened the door.

The subjects Sasha and Pat, what we might calll the breaker of the window-
breaking event and the opener of the door-opening event have something in com-
mon. They are both volitional actors, often animate, and they have direct causal
responsibility for their events.

Thematic roles are a way to capture this semantic commonality between break-
ers and openers. We say that the subjects of both these verbs are agents. Thus,
AGENT is the thematic role that represents an abstract idea such as volitional causa-
tion. Similarly, the direct objects of both these verbs, the BrokenThing and OpenedThing,
are both prototypically inanimate objects that are affected in some way by the action.
The semantic role for these participants is theme.

thematic roles

agents

theme

Thematic Role
AGENT
EXPERIENCER
FORCE
THEME
RESULT

Deﬁnition
The volitional causer of an event
The experiencer of an event
The non-volitional causer of the event
The participant most directly affected by an event
The end product of an event
The proposition or content of a propositional event
CONTENT
An instrument used in an event
INSTRUMENT
The beneﬁciary of an event
BENEFICIARY
The origin of the object of a transfer event
SOURCE
The destination of an object of a transfer event
GOAL
Figure 20.1 Some commonly used thematic roles with their deﬁnitions.

Although thematic roles are one of the oldest linguistic models, as we saw above,
their modern formulation is due to Fillmore (1968) and Gruber (1965). Although
there is no universally agreed-upon set of roles, Figs. 20.1 and 20.2 list some the-
matic roles that have been used in various computational papers, together with rough
deﬁnitions and examples. Most thematic role sets have about a dozen roles, but we’ll
see sets with smaller numbers of roles with even more abstract meanings, and sets
with very large numbers of roles that are speciﬁc to situations. We’ll use the general
term semantic roles for all sets of roles, whether small or large.

semantic roles

20.2 Diathesis Alternations

The main reason computational systems use semantic roles is to act as a shallow
meaning representation that can let us make simple inferences that aren’t possible
from the pure surface string of words, or even from the parse tree. To extend the
earlier examples, if a document says that Company A acquired Company B, we’d
like to know that this answers the query Was Company B acquired? despite the fact
that the two sentences have very different surface syntax. Similarly, this shallow
semantics might act as a useful intermediate language in machine translation.

20.2

• DIATHESIS ALTERNATIONS

443

Thematic Role
AGENT

EXPERIENCER
FORCE
THEME
RESULT
CONTENT
INSTRUMENT

Example
The waiter spilled the soup.
John has a headache.
The wind blows debris from the mall into our yards.
Only after Benjamin Franklin broke the ice...
The city built a regulation-size baseball diamond...
Mona asked “You met Mary Ann at a supermarket?”
He poached catﬁsh, stunning them with a shocking device...
Whenever Ann Callahan makes hotel reservations for her boss...
I ﬂew in from Boston.
I drove to Portland.

BENEFICIARY
SOURCE
GOAL
Figure 20.2 Some prototypical examples of various thematic roles.

Semantic roles thus help generalize over different surface realizations of pred-
icate arguments. For example, while the AGENT is often realized as the subject of
the sentence, in other cases the THEME can be the subject. Consider these possible
realizations of the thematic arguments of the verb break:

(20.3) John

AGENT

(20.4) John

AGENT

(20.5) The rock

broke the window.
THEME
broke the window
THEME
broke the window.
THEME

INSTRUMENT

with a rock.

INSTRUMENT

(20.6) The window

broke.

THEME

(20.7) The window

was broken by John.

THEME

AGENT

thematic grid

case frame

These examples suggest that break has (at least) the possible arguments AGENT,
THEME, and INSTRUMENT. The set of thematic role arguments taken by a verb is
often called the thematic grid, θ -grid, or case frame. We can see that there are
(among others) the following possibilities for the realization of these arguments of
break:

AGENT/Subject, THEME/Object
AGENT/Subject, THEME/Object,
INSTRUMENT/Subject, THEME/Object
THEME/Subject

INSTRUMENT/PPwith

It turns out that many verbs allow their thematic roles to be realized in various
syntactic positions. For example, verbs like give can realize the THEME and GOAL
arguments in two different ways:

(20.8)

a. Doris
AGENT

gave the book

THEME

to Cary.
GOAL

b. Doris
AGENT

gave Cary
GOAL

the book.
THEME

verb
alternation
dative
alternation

These multiple argument structure realizations (the fact that break can take AGENT,

INSTRUMENT, or THEME as subject, and give can realize its THEME and GOAL in
either order) are called verb alternations or diathesis alternations. The alternation
we showed above for give, the dative alternation, seems to occur with particular se-
mantic classes of verbs, including “verbs of future having” (advance, allocate, offer,

444 CHAPTER 20

• SEMANTIC ROLE LABELING

owe), “send verbs” (forward, hand, mail), “verbs of throwing” (kick, pass, throw),
and so on. Levin (1993) lists for 3100 English verbs the semantic classes to which
they belong (47 high-level classes, divided into 193 more speciﬁc classes) and the
various alternations in which they participate. These lists of verb classes have been
incorporated into the online resource VerbNet (Kipper et al., 2000), which links each
verb to both WordNet and FrameNet entries.

20.3 Semantic Roles: Problems with Thematic Roles

Representing meaning at the thematic role level seems like it should be useful in
dealing with complications like diathesis alternations. Yet it has proved quite difﬁ-
cult to come up with a standard set of roles, and equally difﬁcult to produce a formal
deﬁnition of roles like AGENT, THEME, or INSTRUMENT.

For example, researchers attempting to deﬁne role sets often ﬁnd they need to
fragment a role like AGENT or THEME into many speciﬁc roles. Levin and Rappa-
port Hovav (2005) summarize a number of such cases, such as the fact there seem
to be at least two kinds of INSTRUMENTS, intermediary instruments that can appear
as subjects and enabling instruments that cannot:

(20.9)

(20.10)

a. The cook opened the jar with the new gadget.
b. The new gadget opened the jar.

a. Shelly ate the sliced banana with a fork.
b. *The fork ate the sliced banana.

In addition to the fragmentation problem, there are cases in which we’d like to
reason about and generalize across semantic roles, but the ﬁnite discrete lists of roles
don’t let us do this.

Finally, it has proved difﬁcult to formally deﬁne the thematic roles. Consider the
AGENT role; most cases of AGENTS are animate, volitional, sentient, causal, but any
individual noun phrase might not exhibit all of these properties.

semantic role

These problems have led to alternative semantic role models that use either

proto-agent

proto-patient

many fewer or many more roles.

The ﬁrst of these options is to deﬁne generalized semantic roles that abstract
over the speciﬁc thematic roles. For example, PROTO-AGENT and PROTO-PATIENT
are generalized roles that express roughly agent-like and roughly patient-like mean-
ings. These roles are deﬁned, not by necessary and sufﬁcient conditions, but rather
by a set of heuristic features that accompany more agent-like or more patient-like
meanings. Thus, the more an argument displays agent-like properties (being voli-
tionally involved in the event, causing an event or a change of state in another par-
ticipant, being sentient or intentionally involved, moving) the greater the likelihood
that the argument can be labeled a PROTO-AGENT. The more patient-like the proper-
ties (undergoing change of state, causally affected by another participant, stationary
relative to other participants, etc.), the greater the likelihood that the argument can
be labeled a PROTO-PATIENT.

The second direction is instead to deﬁne semantic roles that are speciﬁc to a

particular verb or a particular group of semantically related verbs or nouns.

In the next two sections we describe two commonly used lexical resources that
make use of these alternative versions of semantic roles. PropBank uses both proto-
roles and verb-speciﬁc semantic roles. FrameNet uses semantic roles that are spe-
ciﬁc to a general semantic idea called a frame.

20.4 The Proposition Bank

20.4

• THE PROPOSITION BANK

445

PropBank

The Proposition Bank, generally referred to as PropBank, is a resource of sen-
tences annotated with semantic roles. The English PropBank labels all the sentences
in the Penn TreeBank; the Chinese PropBank labels sentences in the Penn Chinese
TreeBank. Because of the difﬁculty of deﬁning a universal set of thematic roles,
the semantic roles in PropBank are deﬁned with respect to an individual verb sense.
Each sense of each verb thus has a speciﬁc set of roles, which are given only numbers
rather than names: Arg0, Arg1, Arg2, and so on. In general, Arg0 represents the
PROTO-AGENT, and Arg1, the PROTO-PATIENT. The semantics of the other roles
are less consistent, often being deﬁned speciﬁcally for each verb. Nonetheless there
are some generalization; the Arg2 is often the benefactive, instrument, attribute, or
end state, the Arg3 the start point, benefactive, instrument, or attribute, and the Arg4
the end point.

Here are some slightly simpliﬁed PropBank entries for one sense each of the
verbs agree and fall. Such PropBank entries are called frame ﬁles; note that the
deﬁnitions in the frame ﬁle for each role (“Other entity agreeing”, “Extent, amount
fallen”) are informal glosses intended to be read by humans, rather than being formal
deﬁnitions.

(20.11) agree.01

Arg0: Agreer
Arg1: Pr