id:0)

¯Rt

¯Rt

Ia=At −
πt(At)
Ia=At −
(cid:0)
πt(a)

(cid:1)

πt(a)

/πt(At)

.

(cid:1)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:3)

Recall that our plan has been to write the performance gradient as an expecta-
tion of something that we can sample on each step, as we have just done, and
then update on each step proportional to the sample. Substituting a sample
of the expectation above for the performance gradient in (2.11) yields:

Ht+1(a) = Ht(a) + α

¯Rt

Rt −

Ia=At −

πt(a)

,

a,

∀

(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:0)

(cid:1)

which you will recognize as being equivalent to our original algorithm (2.10).

Thus it remains only to show that ∂ πt(b)

assumed earlier. Recall the standard quotient rule for derivatives:

∂Ht(a) = πt(b)
(cid:0)

Ia=b −

(cid:1)

πt(a)

, as we

∂
∂x

f (x)
g(x)

(cid:20)

=

(cid:21)

∂f (x)
∂x g(x)

f (x) ∂g(x)
∂x

−
g(x)2

.

46

CHAPTER 2. MULTI-ARM BANDITS

Using this, we can write

πt(b)

∂
∂Ht(a)
∂
∂Ht(a)
∂eHt(b)
∂Ht(a)

(cid:80)
Ia=beHt(a)

eHt(b)
n
c=1 eHt(c)

(cid:20)
n
c=1 eHt(c)
(cid:80)
(

−
c=1 eHt(c))2

n

(cid:21)
eHt(b) ∂ (cid:80)n

c=1 eHt(c)
∂Ht(a)

n
c=1 eHt(c)
(cid:80)
−
c=1 eHt(c))2
n

(
(cid:80)

eHt(b)eHt(a)

∂ πt(b)
∂Ht(a)

=

=

=

=

=

Ia=beHt(b)

(cid:80)
n
c=1 eHt(c) −

eHt(b)eHt(a)
c=1 eHt(c))2

n

(

= Ia=bπt(b)
(cid:80)
= πt(b)

−
Ia=b −

πt(b)πt(a)
(cid:80)
πt(a)

.

(by the quotient rule)

(because ∂ex

∂x = ex)

Q.E.D.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

We have just shown that the expected update of the gradient-bandit algo-
rithm is equal to the gradient of expected reward, and thus that the algorithm
is an instance of stochastic gradient ascent. This assures us that the algorithm
has robust convergence properties.

Note that we did not require anything of the reward baseline other than
that it not depend on the selected action. For example, we could have set
is to zero, or to 1000, and the algorithm would still have been an instance
of stochastic gradient ascent. The choice of the baseline does not aﬀect the
expected update of the algorithm, but it does aﬀect the variance of the update
and thus the rate of convergence (as shown, e.g., in Figure 2.4). Choosing it
as the average of the rewards may not be the very best, but it is simple and
works well in practice.

2.8 Associative Search (Contextual Bandits)

So far in this chapter we have considered only nonassociative tasks, in which
there is no need to associate diﬀerent actions with diﬀerent situations.
In
these tasks the learner either tries to ﬁnd a single best action when the task is
stationary, or tries to track the best action as it changes over time when the
task is nonstationary. However, in a general reinforcement learning task there
is more than one situation, and the goal is to learn a policy: a mapping from
situations to the actions that are best in those situations. To set the stage for

2.9. SUMMARY

47

the full problem, we brieﬂy discuss the simplest way in which nonassociative
tasks extend to the associative setting.

As an example, suppose there are several diﬀerent n-armed bandit tasks,
and that on each play you confront one of these chosen at random. Thus, the
bandit task changes randomly from play to play. This would appear to you as
a single, nonstationary n-armed bandit task whose true action values change
randomly from play to play. You could try using one of the methods described
in this chapter that can handle nonstationarity, but unless the true action
values change slowly, these methods will not work very well. Now suppose,
however, that when a bandit task is selected for you, you are given some
distinctive clue about its identity (but not its action values). Maybe you are
facing an actual slot machine that changes the color of its display as it changes
its action values. Now you can learn a policy associating each task, signaled
by the color you see, with the best action to take when facing that task—for
instance, if red, play arm 1; if green, play arm 2. With the right policy you
can usually do much better than you could in the absence of any information
distinguishing one bandit task from another.

This is an example of an associative search task, so called because it in-
volves both trial-and-error learning in the form of search for the best actions
and association of these actions with the situations in which they are best.2
Associative search tasks are intermediate between the n-armed bandit problem
and the full reinforcement learning problem. They are like the full reinforce-
ment learning problem in that they involve learning a policy, but like our
version of the n-armed bandit problem in that each action aﬀects only the
immediate reward. If actions are allowed to aﬀect the next situation as well as
the reward, then we have the full reinforcement learning problem. We present
this problem in the next chapter and consider its ramiﬁcations throughout the
rest of the book.

2.9 Summary

We have presented in this chapter several simple ways of balancing exploration
and exploitation. The ε-greedy methods choose randomly a small fraction of
the time, whereas UCB methods choose deterministically but achieve explo-
ration by subtly favoring at each step the actions that have so far received fewer
samples. Gradient-bandit algorithms estimate not action values, but action
preferences, and favor the more preferred actions in a graded, probabalistic
manner using a soft-max distribution. The simple expedient of initializing

2Associative search tasks are often now termed contextual bandits in the literature.

48

CHAPTER 2. MULTI-ARM BANDITS

Figure 2.5: A parameter study of the various bandit algorithms presented in
this chapter. Each point is the average reward obtained over 1000 steps with
a particular algorithm at a particular setting of its parameter.

estimates optimistically causes even greedy methods to explore signiﬁcantly.

It is natural to ask which of these methods is best. Although this is a
diﬃcult question to answer in general, we can certainly run them all on the
10-armed testbed that we have used throughout this chapter and compare
their performances. A complication is that they all have a parameter; to
get a meaningful comparison we will have to consider their performance as
a function of their parameter. Our graphs so far have shown the course of
learning over time for each algorithm and parameter setting, but it would
be too visually confusing to show such a learning curve for each algorithm
and parameter value. Instead we summarize a complete learning curve by its
average value over the 1000 steps; this value is proportional to the area under
the learning curves we have shown up to now. Figure 2.5 shows this measure
for the various bandit algorithms from this chapter, each as a function of its
own parameter shown on a single scale on the x-axis. Note that the parameter
values are varied by factors of two and presented on a log scale. Note also
the characteristic inverted-U shapes of each algorithm’s performance; all the
algorithms perform best at an intermediate value of their parameter, neither
too large nor too big. In assessing an method, we should attend not just to
how well it does at its best parameter setting, but also to how sensitive it is to
its parameter value. All of these algorithms are fairly insensitive, performing
well over a range of parameter values varying by about an order of magnitude.
Overall, on this problem, UCB seems to perform best.

Averagerewardover ﬁrst 1000 steps1.51.41.31.21.11𝜀-greedyUCBgradientbanditgreedy withoptimisticinitializationα = 0.1↵/c/Q01241/21/41/81/161/321/641/1282.9. SUMMARY

49

Despite their simplicity, in our opinion the methods presented in this chap-
ter can fairly be considered the state of the art. There are more sophisticated
methods, but their complexity and assumptions make them impractical for the
full reinforcement learning problem that is our real focus. Starting in Chap-
ter 5 we present learning methods for solving the full reinforcement learning
problem that use in part the simple methods explored in this chapter.

Although the simple methods explored in this chapter may be the best we
can do at present, they are far from a fully satisfactory solution to the problem
of balancing exploration and exploitation.

The classical solution to balancing exploration and exploitation in n-armed
bandit problems is to compute special functions called Gittins indices. These
provide an optimal solution to a certain kind of bandit problem more general
than that considered here but that assumes the prior distribution of possible
problems is known. Unfortunately, neither the theory nor the computational
tractability of this method appear to generalize to the full reinforcement learn-
ing problem that we consider in the rest of the book.

There is also a well-known algorithm for computing the Bayes optimal way
to balance exploration and exploitation. This method is computationally in-
tractable when done exactly, but there may be eﬃcient ways to approximate it.
In this method we assume that we know the distribution of problem instances,
that is, the probability of each possible set of true action values. Given any
action selection, we can then compute the probability of each possible imme-
diate reward and the resultant posterior probability distribution over action
values. This evolving distribution becomes the information state of the prob-
lem. Given a horizon, say 1000 plays, one can consider all possible actions, all
possible resulting rewards, all possible next actions, all next rewards, and so
on for all 1000 plays. Given the assumptions, the rewards and probabilities
of each possible chain of events can be determined, and one need only pick
the best. But the tree of possibilities grows extremely rapidly; even if there
are only two actions and two rewards, the tree will have 22000 leaves. This
approach eﬀectively turns the bandit problem into an instance of the full rein-
forcement learning problem. In the end, we may be able to use reinforcement
learning methods to approximate this optimal solution. But that is a topic for
current research and beyond the scope of this book.

Bibliographical and Historical Remarks

2.1

Bandit problems have been studied in statistics, engineering, and psy-
chology. In statistics, bandit problems fall under the heading “sequen-
tial design of experiments,” introduced by Thompson (1933, 1934) and

50

CHAPTER 2. MULTI-ARM BANDITS

Robbins (1952), and studied by Bellman (1956). Berry and Fristedt
(1985) provide an extensive treatment of bandit problems from the
perspective of statistics. Narendra and Thathachar (1989) treat bandit
problems from the engineering perspective, providing a good discussion
of the various theoretical traditions that have focused on them. In psy-
chology, bandit problems have played roles in statistical learning theory
(e.g., Bush and Mosteller, 1955; Estes, 1950).

The term greedy is often used in the heuristic search literature (e.g.,
Pearl, 1984). The conﬂict between exploration and exploitation is
known in control engineering as the conﬂict between identiﬁcation (or
estimation) and control (e.g., Witten, 1976). Feldbaum (1965) called it
the dual control problem, referring to the need to solve the two prob-
lems of identiﬁcation and control simultaneously when trying to control
a system under uncertainty. In discussing aspects of genetic algorithms,
Holland (1975) emphasized the importance of this conﬂict, referring to
it as the conﬂict between the need to exploit and the need for new
information.

2.2

Action-value methods for our n-armed bandit problem were ﬁrst pro-
posed by Thathachar and Sastry (1985). These are often called esti-
mator algorithms in the learning automata literature. The term action
value is due to Watkins (1989). The ﬁrst to use ε-greedy methods may
also have been Watkins (1989, p. 187), but the idea is so simple that
some earlier use seems likely.

2.3–4 This material falls under the general heading of stochastic iterative

algorithms, which is well covered by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis (1996).

2.5

2.6

2.7

Optimistic initialization was used in reinforcement learning by Sutton
(1996).

Early work on using estimates of the upper conﬁdence bound to select
actions was done by Lai and Robbins (1985), Kaelbling (1993b), and
Agarwal (1995). The UCB algorithm we present here is called UCB1
in the literature and was ﬁrst developed by Auer, Cesa-Bianchi and
Fischer (2002).

Gradient-bandit algorithms are a special case of the gradient-based
reinforcement learning algorithms introduced by Williams (1992), and
that later developed into the actor–critic and policy-gradient algorithms
that we treat later in this book. Further discussion of the choice of

2.9. SUMMARY

51

2.8

2.9

baseline is provided there and by Greensmith, Bartlett, and Baxter
(2001, 2004) and Dick (2015).

The term softmax for the action selection rule (2.9) is due to Bridle
(1990). This rule appears to have been ﬁrst proposed by Luce (1959).

The term associative search and the corresponding problem were in-
troduced by Barto, Sutton, and Brouwer (1981). The term associative
reinforcement learning has also been used for associative search (Barto
and Anandan, 1985), but we prefer to reserve that term as a synonym
for the full reinforcement learning problem (as in Sutton, 1984). (And,
as we noted, the modern literature also uses the term “contextual ban-
dits” for this problem.) We note that Thorndike’s Law of Eﬀect (quoted
in Chapter 1) describes associative search by referring to the formation
of associative links between situations (states) and actions. Accord-
ing to the terminology of operant, or instrumental, conditioning (e.g.,
Skinner, 1938), a discriminative stimulus is a stimulus that signals the
presence of a particular reinforcement contingency. In our terms, dif-
ferent discriminative stimuli correspond to diﬀerent states.

The Gittins index approach is due to Gittins and Jones (1974). Duﬀ
(1995) showed how it is possible to learn Gittins indices for bandit
problems through reinforcement learning. Bellman (1956) was the ﬁrst
to show how dynamic programming could be used to compute the op-
timal balance between exploration and exploitation within a Bayesian
formulation of the problem. The survey by Kumar (1985) provides
a good discussion of Bayesian and non-Bayesian approaches to these
problems. The term information state comes from the literature on
partially observable MDPs; see, e.g., Lovejoy (1991).

Exercises

Exercise 2.1 In the comparison shown in Figure 2.1, which method will
perform best in the long run in terms of cumulative reward and cumulative
probability of selecting the best action? How much better will it be? Express
your answer quantitatively.

Exercise 2.2 Give pseudocode for a complete algorithm for the n-armed
bandit problem. Use greedy action selection and incremental computation of
action values with α = 1
k step-size parameter. Assume a function bandit(a)
that takes an action and returns a reward. Use arrays and variables; do not

52

CHAPTER 2. MULTI-ARM BANDITS

subscript anything by the time index t (for examples of this style of pseu-
docode, see Figures 4.1 and 4.3). Indicate how the action values are initialized
and updated after each reward. Indicate how the step-size parameters are set
for each action as a function of how many times it has been tried.

Exercise 2.3 If the step-size parameters, αk, are not constant, the